ONE
TUESDAY, JANUARY 19
Pulling one hand from the warmth of a pocket, Jay Landsman squats down
to grab the dead man’s chin, pushing the head to one side until the wound
becomes visible as a small, ovate hole, oozing red and white.
“Here’s your problem,” he said. “He’s got a slow leak.”
“A leak?” says Pellegrini, picking up on it.
“A slow one.”
“You can fix those.”
“Sure you can,” Landsman agrees. “They got these home repair kits
now …”
“Like with tires.”
“Just like with tires,” Landsman says. “Comes with a patch and
everything else you need. Now a bigger wound, like from a thirty-eight,
you’re gonna have to get a new head. This one you could fix.”
Landsman looks up, his face the very picture of earnest concern.
Sweet Jesus, thinks Tom Pellegrini, nothing like working murders with
a mental case. One in the morning, heart of the ghetto, half a dozen
uniforms watching their breath freeze over another dead man—what better
time and place for some vintage Landsman, delivered in perfect deadpan
until even the shift commander is laughing hard in the blue strobe of the
emergency lights. Not that a Western District midnight shift is the world’s
toughest audience; you don’t ride a radio car for any length of time in
Sector 1 or 2 without cultivating a diseased sense of humor.
“Anyone know this guy?” asks Landsman. “Anyone get to talk to him?”
“Fuck no,” says a uniform. “He was ten-seven when we got here.”
Ten-seven. The police communication code for “out of service” artlessly
applied to a human life. Beautiful. Pellegrini smiles, content in theknowledge that nothing in this world can come between a cop and his
attitude.
“Anyone go through his pockets?” asks Landsman.
“Not yet.”
“Where the fuck are his pockets?”
“He’s wearing pants underneath the sweatsuit.”
Pellegrini watches Landsman straddle the body, one foot on either side
of the dead man’s waist, and begin tugging violently at the sweatpants. The
awkward effort jerks the body a few inches across the sidewalk, leaving a
thin film of matted blood and brain matter where the head wound scrapes
the pavement. Landsman forces a meaty hand inside a front pocket.
“Watch for needles,” says a uniform.
“Hey,” says Landsman. “Anyone in this crowd gets AIDS, no one’s
gonna believe it came from a fucking needle.”
The sergeant pulls his hand from the dead man’s right front pocket,
causing perhaps a dollar in change to fall to the sidewalk.
“No wallet in front. I’m gonna wait and let the ME roll him.
Somebody’s called the ME, right?”
“Should be on the way,” says a second uniform, taking notes for the top
sheet of an incident report. “How many times is he hit?”
Landsman points to the head wound, then lifts a shoulder blade to reveal
a ragged hole in the upper back of the dead man’s leather jacket.
“Once in the head, once in the back.” Landsman pauses, and Pellegrini
watches him go deadpan once again. “It could be more.”
The uniform puts pen to paper.
“There is a possibility,” says Landsman, doing his best to look
professorial, “a good possibility, he was shot twice through the same
bullethole.”
“No shit,” says the uniform, believing.
A mental case. They give him a gun, a badge and sergeant’s stripes, and
deal him out into the streets of Baltimore, a city with more than its share of
violence, filth and despair. Then they surround him with a chorus of blue-
jacketed straight men and let him play the role of the lone, wayward joker
that somehow slipped into the deck. Jay Landsman, of the sidelong smile
and pockmarked face, who tells the mothers of wanted men that all the
commotion is nothing to be upset about, just a routine murder warrant.
Landsman, who leaves empty liquor bottles in the other sergeants’ desksand never fails to turn out the men’s room light when a ranking officer is
indisposed. Landsman, who rides a headquarters elevator with the police
commissioner and leaves complaining that some sonofabitch stole his
wallet. Jay Landsman, who as a Southwestern patrolman parked his radio
car at Edmondson and Hilton, then used a Quaker Oatmeal box covered in
aluminum foil as a radar gun.
“I’m just giving you a warning this time,” he would tell grateful
motorists. “Remember, only you can prevent forest fires.”
And now, but for the fact that Landsman can no longer keep a straight
face, there might well be an incident report tracked to Central Records in
the departmental mail, complaint number 88-7A37548, indicating that said
victim appeared to be shot once in the head and twice in the back through
the same bullethole.
“No, hey, I’m joking,” he says finally. “We won’t know anything for
sure until the autopsy tomorrow.”
He looks at Pellegrini.
“Hey, Phyllis, I’m gonna let the ME roll him.”
Pellegrini manages a half-smile. He’s been Phyllis to his squad sergeant
ever since that long afternoon at Rikers Island in New York, when a jail
matron refused to honor a writ and release a female prisoner into the
custody of two male detectives from Baltimore; the regulations required a
policewoman for the escort. After a sufficient amount of debate, Landsman
grabbed Tom Pellegrini, a thick-framed Italian born to Allegheny coal
miner stock, and pushed him forward.
“Meet Phyllis Pellegrini,” Landsman said, signing for the prisoner.
“She’s my partner.”
“How do you do?” Pellegrini said with no hesitation.
“You’re not a woman,” said the matron.
“But I used to be.”
With the blue strobe glancing off his pale face, Tom Pellegrini moves a
step closer to take stock of what half an hour earlier had been a twenty-six-
year-old street dealer. The dead man is sprawled on his back, legs in the
gutter, arms partly extended, head facing north near the side door of a
corner rowhouse. Dark brown eyes are fixed under half-lids in that
expression of vague recognition so common to the newly and suddenly
departed. It is not a look of horror, consternation, or even distress. More
often than not, the last visage of a murdered man resembles that of aflustered schoolchild to whom the logic of a simple equation has just been
revealed.
“If you’re okay here,” says Pellegrini, “I’m gonna go across the street.”
“What’s up?”
“Well …”
Landsman moves closer and Pellegrini lowers his voice, as if the spoken
suggestion that there may be a witness to this murder would be an
embarrassing display of optimism.
“There’s a woman who went into a house across the street. Someone
told one of the first officers she was outside when the shooting started.”
“She saw it?”
“Well, supposedly she told people it was three black males in dark
clothes. They ran north after the shots.”
It isn’t much, and Pellegrini can read his sergeant’s mind: three yos
wearing black, a description that narrows the list to about half the fucking
city. Landsman nods vaguely and Pellegrini begins making his way across
Gold Street, stepping carefully around the patches of ice that cover much of
the intersection. It is early morning now, half past two, and the temperature
is well below freezing. A bracing wind catches the detective in the center of
the street, cutting through his overcoat. On the other side of Etting, the
locals have gathered to mark the event, younger men and teenagers
signifying, scoping the unexpected entertainment, each one straining to
catch a glimpse of the dead man’s face across the street. Jokes are
exchanged and stories whispered, but even the youngest knows to avert his
eyes and fall silent at a first question from a uniform. There is no good
reason to do otherwise, because in a half hour the dead man will be laid out
on a table for one at the ME’s chop shop on Penn Street, the Western men
will be stirring coffee at the Monroe Street 7-Eleven and the dealers will be
selling blue-topped caps again at this godforsaken crossroads of Gold and
Etting. Nothing said now is going to change any of that.
The crowd watches Pellegrini cross the street, eyefucking him in a way
that only the west side corner boys can as he walks to a painted stone stoop
and hits a wood door with a rapid, three-beat motion. Waiting for a
response, the detective watches a battered Buick roll west on Gold, idling
slowly toward and then past him. Brake lights flash for a moment as the car
approaches the blue strobes on the other side of the street. Pellegrini turns
to watch the Buick roll a few blocks farther west to the Brunt Street corners,where a small coterie of runners and touts have resumed work, selling
heroin and cocaine a respectful distance from the murder scene. The Buick
shows its taillights again, and a lone figure slips from one corner and leans
into the driver’s window. Business is business, and the Gold Street market
waits for no man, certainly not the dead dealer across the street.
Pellegrini knocks again and steps close to the door, listening for
movement inside. From upstairs comes a muffled sound. The detective
exhales slowly and raps again, bringing a young girl to a second-floor
window in the next rowhouse.
“Hey there,” Pellegrini says, “police department.”
“Uh-huh.”
“Do you know if Katherine Thompson lives next door?”
“Yeah, she do.”
“Is she home now?”
“Guess so.”
Heavy pounding on the door is answered at last by a light from upstairs,
where a frame window is suddenly and violently wrenched upward. A
heavyset, middle-aged woman—fully dressed, the detective notes—pushes
head and shoulders across the sill and stares down at Pellegrini.
“Who the hell is knocking on my door this late?”
“Mrs. Thompson?”
“Yeah.”
“Police.”
“Poh-leece?”
Jesus Christ, Pellegrini thinks, what else would a white man in a
trenchcoat be doing on Gold Street after midnight? He pulls the shield and
holds it toward the window.
“Could I talk to you for a moment?”
“No, you can’t,” she says, expelling the words in a singsong, slow
enough and loud enough to reach the crowd across the street. “I got nothing
to say to you. People be trying to sleep and you knocking on my door this
late.”
“You were asleep?”
“I ain’t got to say what I was.”
“I need to talk with you about the shooting.”
“Well, I ain’t got a damn thing to say to you.”
“Someone died …”“I know it.”
“We’re investigating it.”
“So?”
Tom Pellegrini suppresses an almost overwhelming desire to see this
woman dragged into a police wagon and bounced over every pothole
between here and headquarters. Instead, he looks hard at the woman’s face
and speaks his last words in a laconic tone that betrays only weariness.
“I can come back with a grand jury summons.”
“Then come on back with your damn summons. You come here this
time a night telling me I got to talk to you when I don’t want to.”
Pellegrini steps back from the front stoop and looks at the blue glow
from the emergency lights. The morgue wagon, a Dodge van with blacked-
out windows, has pulled to the curb, but every kid on every corner is now
gazing across the street, watching this woman make it perfectly clear to a
police detective that under no circumstances is she a living witness to a
drug murder.
“It’s your neighborhood.”
“Yeah, it is,” she says, slamming the window.
Pellegrini shakes his head gently, then walks back across the street,
arriving in time to watch the crew of the morgue wagon roll the body. From
a jacket pocket comes a wristwatch and keys. From a rear pants pocket
comes an identification card. Newsome, Rudolph Michael, male, black,
date of birth 3/5/61, address 2900 Allendale.
Landsman pulls the white rubber gloves from his hands, drops them in
the gutter and looks at his detective.
“Anything?” he asks.
“No,” says Pellegrini.
Landsman shrugs. “I’m glad it’s you that got this one.”
Pellegrini’s chiseled face creases into a small, brief smile, accepting his
sergeant’s declaration of faith for the consolation prize it is. With less than
two years in homicide, Tom Pellegrini is generally regarded to be the
hardest worker in Sergeant Jay Landsman’s squad of five detectives. And
that matters now, because both men know that Baltimore’s thirteenth
homicide of 1988, handed to them on the second leg of a midnight shift at
the corner of Gold and Etting, is an exceptionally weak sister: a drug killing
with no known witnesses, no specific motive and no suspects. Perhaps the
only person in Baltimore who might have managed some real interest in thecase is at this moment being shoveled onto a body litter. Rudy Newsome’s
brother will make the identification later that morning outside a freezer door
across from the autopsy room, but after that the boy’s family will offer little
else. The morning newspaper will print not a line about the killing. The
neighborhood, or whatever is left around Gold and Etting that resembles a
neighborhood, will move on. West Baltimore, home of the misdemeanor
homicide.
All of which is not to say that any man in Landsman’s squad wouldn’t
give Rudy Newsome’s murder a shake or two. A police department is
fueled by its own stats, and a homicide clearance—any clearance—will
always earn a detective some court time and a few attaboys. But Pellegrini
is playing the game for more than that: He’s a detective still in the process
of proving things to himself, hungry for more experience and fresh to the
daily grind. Landsman has watched him build cases on murders about
which nothing should have been learned. The Green case from the
Lafayette Court projects. Or that shooting outside Odell’s up on North
Avenue, the one where Pellegrini walked up and down a bombed-out alley,
kicking trash until he found a spent .38 slug that put the case down. To
Landsman, the amazing thing is that Tom Pellegrini, a ten-year veteran of
the force, came to homicide straight from the City Hall security detail only
weeks after the mayor became the odds-on favorite for governor in a
Democratic primary landslide. It was a political appointment, plain and
simple, handed down from the deputy commissioner for services as if the
governor himself had poured the oil on Pellegrini’s head. Everyone in
homicide assumed that the new man would need about three months to
prove himself an absolute hump.
“Well,” says Pellegrini, squeezing behind the wheel of an unmarked
Chevy Cavalier, “so far so good.”
Landsman laughs. “This one will go down, Tom.”
Pellegrini shoots back a look that Landsman ignores. The Cavalier slips
past block after block of rowhouse ghetto, rolling down Druid Hill Avenue
until it crosses Martin Luther King Boulevard and the Western District
gives way to the early morning emptiness of downtown. The chill is
keeping them in; even the drunks are gone from the Howard Street benches.
Pellegrini slows before running every light until he catches the red signal at
Lexington and Calvert, a few blocks from headquarters, where a lone
whore, unmistakably a transvestite, gestures furtively at the car from thedoorway of a corner office. Landsman laughs. Pellegrini wonders how any
prostitute in this city could fail to understand the significance of a Chevy
Cavalier with a six-inch antenna on its ass.
“Look at this pretty motherfucker,” says Landsman. “Let’s pull over and
fuck with him.”
The car eases through the intersection and pulls to the curb. Landsman
rolls down the passenger window. The whore’s face is hard, a man’s face.
“Hey, sir.”
The whore looks away in cold rage.
“Hey, mister,” yells Landsman.
“I ain’t no mister,” the whore says, walking back to the corner.
“Sir, would you have the time?”
“Go fuck yourself.”
Landsman laughs malevolently. One of these days, Pellegrini knows, his
sergeant will say something bizarre to someone who matters and half the
squad will be writing reports for a week.
“I think you hurt his feelings.”
“Well,” says Landsman, still laughing, “I didn’t mean to.”
A few minutes later, the two men are backed into a parking space on the
second tier of the headquarters garage. On the bottom of the same page
recording the particulars of Rudy Newsome’s death, Pellegrini writes the
number of the parking space and the mileage on the odometer, then circles
the two figures. Murders come and go in this town, but God forbid you
should forget to write the correct mileage on your activity sheet or, worse
yet, forget to note the parking space so that the next man out spends fifteen
minutes walking up and down the headquarters garage, trying to figure out
which Cavalier matches the ignition key in his hand.
Pellegrini follows Landsman across the garage and through a metal
bulkhead door to the second-floor hallway. Landsman punches the elevator
button.
“I wonder what Fahlteich got from Gatehouse Drive.”
“Was that a murder?” asks Pellegrini.
“Yeah. It sounded like it on the radio.”
The elevator slowly ascends, opening on another, similar corridor with
waxed linoleum and hospital blue walls, and Pellegrini follows his sergeant
down the long hall. From inside the aquarium—the soundproof room ofmetal and plate glass where witnesses sit before being interviewed—comes
the sound of young girls laughing softly.
Hail Mary. Here be witnesses from Fahlteich’s shooting at the city’s
other end—living, breathing witnesses brought forth by the gods from the
scene of the new year’s fourteenth homicide. What the hell, thinks
Pellegrini, at least somebody in the squad had a little luck tonight.
The voices in the aquarium slip away as the two men move down the
hall. Just before turning the corner into the squadroom, Pellegrini looks into
the darkened aquarium’s side door and glimpses the orange glow of a
cigarette and the outline of the woman seated closest to the door. He sees a
hard face, the deep brown features fixed like granite, the eyes offering only
seasoned contempt. Helluva body, too: nice chest, good legs, yellow
miniskirt. Someone probably would have said something by now if she
wasn’t all attitude.
Mistaking this casual assessment for genuine opportunity, the girl
saunters from the aquarium to the edge of the office, then knocks lightly on
the metal frame.
“Can I make a call?”
“Who do you want to talk to?”
“My ride.”
“No, not now. After you’re interviewed.”
“What about my ride?”
“One of the uniformed officers will take you home.”
“I’ve been here an hour,” she says, crossing her legs in the doorway.
The woman has the face of a teamster, but she’s giving this her best shot.
Pellegrini is unimpressed. He can see Landsman smiling at him wickedly
from the other side of the office.
“We’ll get to you as fast as we can.”
Abandoning any thought of seduction, the woman walks back to join
her girlfriend on the fishbowl’s green vinyl couch, crosses her legs again
and lights another cigarette.
The woman is here because she had the misfortune to be inside a garden
apartment in the Purnell Village complex on Gatehouse Drive, where a
Jamaican drug dealer named Carrington Brown played host to another Jake
by the name of Roy Johnson. There was some preliminary talk, a few
accusations delivered in a lilting West Indian accent, and then a
considerable amount of gunfire.Dick Fahlteich, a balding, bantam-size veteran of Landsman’s squad,
got the call minutes after the dispatcher sent Pellegrini and his sergeant to
Gold Street. He arrived to find Roy Johnson dead in the living room with
more than a dozen gunshot wounds afflicting every conceivable part of his
body. His host, Carrington Brown, was on the way to the University
Hospital emergency room with four chest wounds. There were bullet-holes
in the walls, bullet-holes in the furniture, automatic .380 casings and
hysterical women scattered across the apartment. Fahlteich and two crime
lab techs would spend the next five hours pulling evidence out of the place.
That leaves Landsman and Pellegrini to sort through the witnesses sent
downtown. Their interviews begin reasonably and orderly enough; taking
turns, the detectives escort each witness into a separate office, fill out an
information sheet and write out a statement of several pages for the witness
to sign and date. The work is routine and repetitive; in the last year alone,
Pellegrini has probably debriefed a couple hundred witnesses, most of them
liars, all of them reluctant.
The process abruptly enters its second, more intensive phase a half hour
later when an enraged Landsman hurls a four-page statement to the floor of
a back office, slams his hand on a desk, and screams for the girl in the
yellow miniskirt to get her ugly, untruthful, drug-ridden self out of his
office. Well, thinks Pellegrini, listening at the other end of the hall, it isn’t
taking Landsman long to get down to business.
“YOU’RE A LYING BITCH,” Landsman shouts, slamming the office
door against its rubber stop. “DO YOU THINK I’M STUPID? DO YOU
FUCKING THINK I’M STUPID?”
“What did I lie about?”
“Get the fuck out of here. You’re charged.”
“Charged with what?”
Landsman’s face contorts into pure rage.
“YOU THINK THIS IS BULLSHIT? DO YOU?”
The girl says nothing.
“You just got a charge, you lying piece of shit.”
“I didn’t lie.”
“Fuck you. You’re charged.”
The sergeant points the woman toward the small interrogation room,
where she slumps into a chair and stretches her legs up over a Formica
table. The miniskirt rides down toward her waist, but Landsman is in nomood to enjoy the fact that the woman wears nothing under her skirt. He
leaves the door slightly ajar as he yells to Pellegrini across the squadroom.
“NEUTRON THIS BITCH,” he shouts before closing the soundproof
door to the small interrogation room, leaving the girl to wonder what sort of
technological torture awaits. A neutron activation test requires only a
painless swab of the hands to determine the presence of barium and
antimony, elements deposited after a handgun is fired, but Landsman wants
to leave her stewing on it, hoping she’s in that box imagining that
someone’s about to irradiate her until she glows. The sergeant slams his
open palm against the metal door one last time for proper emphasis, but the
rage is gone even as he walks back into the main office. A staged
performance—more vintage Landsman—delivered with gusto and sincerity
for the lying bitch in the yellow miniskirt.
Pellegrini comes out of the coffee room and closes the door.
“What does yours say?”
“She didn’t see it,” says Pellegrini. “But she said your girl knows what
happened.”
“I fucking know she does.”
“What do you want to do?”
“Take the statement from your girl,” says Landsman, bumming a
cigarette from his detective. “I’m gonna let this one sit for a while, then go
back in and fuck with her.”
Pellegrini returns to the coffee room and Landsman slumps into a desk
chair. Cigarette smoke slips from the side of his mouth.
“Fuck this,” says Jay Landsman to no one in particular. “I’m not gonna
swallow two open cases in one night.”
And so a graceless, nocturnal ballet resumes, with witnesses gliding
past one another beneath the washed-out glare of tube lighting, each flanked
by a tired, impassive detective cradling black coffee and enough blank
statement forms to record the next round of half-truths. Pages are collated,
initialed, and signed, Styrofoam coffee cups are refilled and cigarettes
bartered until the detectives again assemble in the squadroom to compare
notes and decide who’s lying, who’s lying more, and who’s lying the most.
In another hour, Fahlteich will return from the murder scene and hospital
with enough details to vouch for the one honest witness brought downtown
that night—a woman who happened to be walking across the parking lot
and recognized one of the two gunmen as he entered the apartment. Thewoman knows what it means to talk about a drug murder and soon wishes
she could take back everything she said to Fahlteich at the scene. Sent
downtown immediately, she has been kept at a distance from the occupants
of the apartment and is interviewed by Landsman and Fahlteich only after
the detective returns from Gatehouse Drive. She shakes violently when the
detectives bring up the subject of grand jury testimony.
“I can’t do that,” she says, breaking into tears.
“There’s no choice.”
“My children …”
“We’re not going to let anything happen.”
Landsman and Fahlteich leave the office to talk softly in the hallway.
“She’s fucking terrified,” says Landsman.
“No shit.”
“We gotta grand jury her first thing tomorrow, before she has a chance
to start backing up.”
“We also got to keep her separate from the others,” says Fahlteich,
throwing a finger toward the witnesses in the fishbowl. “I don’t want any of
them to get a look at her.”
By morning, they will have a nickname and general description for the
missing gunman, and by the end of the week, his full name, police
identification number, mug shot and the address of the North Carolina
relatives who are hiding him. A week more and the kid is back in
Baltimore, charged with first-degree murder and a weapons violation.
The story of Roy Johnson’s murder is brutal in its simplicity, simple in
its brutality. The shooter is Stanley Gwynn, an eighteen-year-old moon-
faced kid who served as bodyguard to Johnson, a New York cocaine
connect who had armed his true and loyal subordinate with an Ingram Mac-
11 .380 machine pistol. Johnson visited the Gatehouse Drive apartment
because Carrington Brown owed him money for cocaine, and when Brown
wouldn’t pay, Gwynn ended the negotiations with a long burst from the
Ingram, a weapon capable of firing six rounds a second.
It was an impulsive, awkward performance, the sort of thing to be
expected from a teenager. The attack was so clearly telegraphed that
Carrington Brown was afforded more than enough time to grab Roy
Johnson and use him as a shield. Before the scene in front of him registered
in Stanley Gwynn’s brain, he had machine-gunned the man he was
supposed to protect. The intended target, Carrington Brown, lay bleedingfrom four bullets that had somehow found their way past the dead man, and
Stanley Gwynn—who will later take a second-degree plea and twenty-five
years—ran in panic from the apartment building.
When the dayshift detectives bring early relief at 6:30, the Roy Johnson
murder, case H88014, is tucked neatly inside a manila folder on the
administrative lieutenant’s desk. An hour later, Dick Fahlteich is headed
home for a quick shower before returning downtown to attend the autopsy.
For his part, Landsman will be in his own bed by 8:00 A.M.
But as sunlight and the sounds of the morning rush hour seep through
the sixth-floor windows, the flotsam and jetsam of H88013—the murder at
Gold and Etting—are still scattered in front of Tom Pellegrini, a coffee-
logged wraith who stares vacantly at the first officer’s report, at
supplementals, evidence submission slips, body custody and fingerprint
forms for the person of Rudolph Newsome. Fifteen minutes either way and
Pellegrini could have been dispatched to the Gatehouse Drive shooting,
where a living victim and living witnesses were waiting to give up a murder
and add one more to the list of clearances. Instead, Pellegrini went to Gold
and Etting, where a twenty-six-year-old dead man stared up at him with
sudden, silent comprehension. Luck of the draw.
After Landsman’s departure, Pellegrini works the edges of his little
disaster for another ten hours—pulling the paperwork together, calling an
assistant state’s attorney about a grand jury summons for the Thompson
woman and submitting the victim’s effects to the evidence control unit in
the basement of headquarters. Later that morning, a Western District
patrolman calls the homicide unit about some corner boy who got locked up
for drugs by the midnight shift and claimed to know about the Gold Street
shooting. Seems the kid is willing to talk if he can make a lower bail on the
drug charge. Pellegrini finishes his fifth cup of coffee before going back out
to the Western to take a brief statement from the boy, who claims to have
seen three men running north off Gold Street after hearing shots. The kid
says he knows one of the men, but only by the name Joe—a statement just
specific enough to match the true scenario, just vague enough to be of no
practical use to the detective. Pellegrini wonders whether the kid was even
there or whether he picked up what he could about the Gold Street murder
while sitting in the lockup overnight, then did his best to turn the
information around and try to barter out from under the drug charge.Back in homicide, the detective slips the notes from the interview inside
the case file for H88013 and then slides the folder underneath the Roy
Johnson file on the desk of the administrative lieutenant, who has come and
gone on the eight-to-four shift. Good news before bad. Then Pellegrini
gives a man on four-to-twelve the keys to his Cavalier and goes home. It is
a little after 7:00 P.M.
Four hours later, he’s back for the midnight shift, hovering like a moth
around the red pilot light of the coffee machine. Pellegrini takes a full cup
into the squadroom, where Landsman begins playing with him.
“Hey, Phyllis,” says the sergeant.
“Hey, Sarge.”
“Your case is down, isn’t it?”
“My case?”
“Yeah.”
“Which case would that be?”
“The new one,” says Landsman. “From Gold Street.”
“Well,” says Pellegrini, the words rolling out slowly, “I am ready to get
a warrant.”
“Oh yeah?”
“Yeah.”
“Hmmm,” says Landsman, blowing cigarette smoke at the television
screen.
“Only one problem, though.”
“What’s that,” says the sergeant, now smiling.
“I don’t know who the warrant is for.”
Landsman laughs until the cigarette smoke makes him cough.
“Don’t worry, Tom,” he says finally. “It’ll go down.”
This is the job:
You sit behind a government-issue metal desk on the sixth of ten floors
in a gleaming, steel-frame death trap with poor ventilation, dysfunctional
air conditioning, and enough free-floating asbestos to pad the devil’s own
jumpsuit. You eat $2.50 pizza specials and Italian cold cuts with extra hots
from Marco’s on Exeter Street while watching reruns of Hawaii Five-O on
the communal nineteen-inch set with insubordinate horizontal hold. You
answer the phone on the second or third bleat because Baltimore abandoned
its AT&T equipment as a cost-saving measure and the new phone systemdoesn’t ring so much as it emits metallic, sheeplike sounds. If a police
dispatcher is on the other end of the call, you write down an address, the
time, and the dispatcher’s unit number on a piece of scratch paper or the
back of a used three-by-five pawn shop submission card.
Then you beg or barter the keys to one of a half-dozen unmarked
Chevrolet Cavaliers, grab your gun, a notepad, a flashlight and a pair of
white rubber gloves and drive to the correct address where, in all
probability, a uniformed police officer will be standing over a cooling
human body.
You look at that body. You look at that body as if it were some abstract
work of art, stare at it from every conceivable point of view in search of
deeper meanings and textures. Why, you ask yourself, is this body here?
What did the artist leave out? What did he put in? What was the artist
thinking of? What the hell is wrong with this picture?
You look for reasons. Overdose? Heart attack? Gunshot wounds?
Cutting? Are those defense wounds on the left hand? Jewelry? Wallet?
Pockets turned inside out? Rigor mortis? Lividity? Why is there a blood
trail, with droplets spattering in a direction away from the body?
You walk around the edges of the scene looking for spent bullets,
casings, blood droplets. You get a uniform to canvass the houses or
businesses nearby, or if you want it done right, you go door-to-door
yourself, asking questions that the uniforms might never think to ask.
Then you use everything in the arsenal in the hope that something—
anything—will work. The crime lab technicians recover weapons, bullets
and casings for ballistic comparisons. If you’re indoors, you have the techs
take prints from doors and door handles, furniture and utensils. You
examine the body and its immediate surroundings for loose hairs or fibers
on the off chance that the trace evidence lab might actually put down a case
now and then. You look for any other signs of disturbance, anything that
doesn’t appear to conform to its surroundings. If something strikes you—a
loose pillowcase, a discarded beer can—you have a technician take it down
to evidence control as well. Then you have the techs measure key distances
and photograph the entire scene from every conceivable angle. You sketch
the death scene in your own notebook, using a crude stickman for the
victim and marking the original location of every piece of furniture and
every piece of evidence recovered.Assuming that the uniforms, upon arriving at the scene, were sharp
enough to grab anyone within sight and send them downtown, you then go
back to your office and throw as much street-corner psychology as you can
at the people who found the body. You do the same thing with a few others
who knew the victim, who rented a room to the victim, who employed the
victim, who fucked, fought or fired drugs with the victim. Are they lying?
Of course they’re lying. Everyone lies. Are they lying more than they
ordinarily would? Probably. Why are they lying? Do their half-truths
conform to what you know from the crime scene or is it complete and
unequivocal bullshit? Who should you yell at first? Who should you scream
at loudest? Who gets threatened with an accessory to murder charge? Who
gets the speech about leaving the interrogation room as either a witness or a
suspect? Who gets offered the excuse—The Out—the suggestion that this
poor bastard needed to be murdered, that anyone in their circumstance
would have murdered him, that they only killed the bastard because he
provoked them, that they didn’t mean it and the gun went off accidentally,
that they only fired in self-defense?
If all goes well, you lock someone up that night. If all goes not so well,
you take what you know and run with it in the most promising direction,
kicking a few more facts loose in the hope that something will give. When
nothing gives, you wait a few weeks for the lab work to come back with a
positive on the ballistics or the fibers or the semen. When the lab reports
come back negative, you wait for the phone to ring. And when the phone
doesn’t ring, you let a little piece of you die. Then you go back to your desk
and wait for another call from the dispatcher, who sooner or later will send
you out to look at another body. Because in a city with 240 murders a year,
there will always be another body.
Television has given us the myth of the raging pursuit, the high-speed
chase, but in truth there is no such thing; if there were, God knows the
Cavalier would throw a rod after a dozen blocks and you’d be writing a
Form 95 in which you respectfully submit to your commanding officer the
reasons why you drove a city-owned four-cylinder wonder into an early
grave. And there are no fistfights or running gun battles: The glory days of
thumping someone on a domestic call or letting a round or two fly in the
heat of some gas station holdup ended when you came downtown from
patrol. The murder police always get there after the bodies fall and a
homicide detective leaving the office has to remind himself to take his .38out of the top right desk drawer. And, most certainly, there are no perfectly
righteous moments when a detective, a scientific wizard with uncanny
powers of observation, leans down to examine a patch of bloody carpet,
plucks up a distinctive strand of red-brown caucasoid hair, gathers his
suspects in an exquisitely furnished parlor, and then declares his case to be
solved. The truth is that there are very few exquisitely furnished parlors left
in Baltimore; even if there were, the best homicide detectives will admit
that in ninety cases out of a hundred, the investigator’s saving grace is the
killer’s overwhelming predisposition toward incompetence or, at the very
least, gross error.
More often than not, the murderer has left behind living witnesses or
even bragged to someone about the crime. In a surprising number of cases,
the killer—particularly one unfamiliar with the criminal justice system—
can be manipulated into a confession in the interrogation rooms. On rare
occasions, a latent print taken from a drinking glass or knife hilt will match
up with someone’s print card on the Printrak computer, but most detectives
can count on one hand the number of cases made by lab work. A good cop
goes to the crime scene, gathers the available evidence, talks to the right
people and with any luck discovers the murderer’s most glaring mistakes.
But in that alone there is talent and instinct enough.
If the pieces do fall into place, some unlucky citizen gets a pair of silver
bracelets and a wagon ride to an overcrowded tier of the Baltimore City
Jail. There he sits as his trial date is postponed for eight or nine months or
however long it takes your witnesses to change addresses two or three
times. Then an assistant state’s attorney, who has every intention of
maintaining a better than average conviction rate so that he can one day
come to rest in a better than average criminal law firm, calls you on the
telephone. He assures you that this is the weakest homicide indictment he
has ever had the misfortune to prosecute, so weak that he cannot believe it
to be the work of a legitimate grand jury, and could you please round up the
brain-dead cattle you call witnesses and bring them down for pretrial
interviews because this thing is actually going to court on Monday. Unless,
of course, he can convince the defense attorney to swallow manslaughter
with all but five years suspended.
If the case isn’t plea-bargained, dismissed or placed on the inactive
docket for an indefinite period of time, if by some perverse twist of fate it
becomes a trial by jury, you will then have the opportunity of sitting on thewitness stand and reciting under oath the facts of the case—a brief moment
in the sun that clouds over with the appearance of the aforementioned
defense attorney who, at worst, will accuse you of perjuring yourself in a
gross injustice or, at best, accuse you of conducting an investigation so
incredibly slipshod that the real killer has been allowed to roam free.
Once both sides have loudly argued the facts of the case, a jury of
twelve men and women picked from computer lists of registered voters in
one of America’s most undereducated cities will go to a room and begin
shouting. If these happy people manage to overcome the natural impulse to
avoid any act of collective judgment, they just may find one human being
guilty of murdering another. Then you can go to Cher’s Pub at Lexington
and Guilford, where that selfsame assistant state’s attorney, if possessed of
any human qualities at all, will buy you a bottle of domestic beer.
And you drink it. Because in a police department of about three
thousand sworn souls, you are one of thirty-six investigators entrusted with
the pursuit of that most extraordinary of crimes: the theft of a human life.
You speak for the dead. You avenge those lost to the world. Your paycheck
may come from fiscal services but, goddammit, after six beers you can
pretty much convince yourself that you work for the Lord himself. If you
are not as good as you should be, you’ll be gone within a year or two,
transferred to fugitive, or auto theft or check and fraud at the other end of
the hall. If you are good enough, you will never do anything else as a cop
that matters this much. Homicide is the major leagues, the center ring, the
show. It always has been. When Cain threw a cap into Abel, you don’t think
the Big Guy told a couple of fresh uniforms to go down and work up the
prosecution report. Hell no, he sent for a fucking detective. And it will
always be that way, because the homicide unit of any urban police force has
for generations been the natural habitat of that rarefied species, the thinking
cop.
It goes beyond academic degrees, specialized training or book learning,
because all the theory in the world means nothing if you can’t read the
street. But it goes beyond that, too. In every ghetto precinct house, there are
aging patrolmen who know everything a homicide man knows, yet
somehow they spend their careers in battered radio cars, fighting their
battles in eight-hour installments and worrying about a case only until the
next shift change. A good detective begins as a good patrolman, a soldier
who has spent years clearing corners and making car stops, breaking in ondomestics and checking the back doors of warehouses until the life of a city
becomes second nature to him. And that detective is further honed as a
plainclothesman, working enough years of burglary or narcotics or auto
until he understands what it means to do surveillance, to use and not be
used by an informant, to write a coherent search and seizure warrant. And
of course there is the specialized training, the solid grounding in forensic
science, in pathology, criminal law, fingerprints, fibers, blood typing,
ballistics, and DNA-genetic coding. A good detective also has to fill his
head with enough knowledge of the existing police information data base—
arrest records, jail records, weapons registrations, motor vehicle
information—to qualify for a minor in computer science. And yet, given all
that, a good homicide man has something more, something as internalized
and instinctive as police work itself. Inside every good detective are hidden
mechanisms—compasses that bring him from a dead body to a living
suspect in the shortest span of time, gyroscopes that guarantee balance in
the worst storms.
A Baltimore detective handles about nine or ten homicides a year as the
primary investigator and another half dozen as the secondary detective,
although FBI guidelines suggest half that workload. He handles fifty to
sixty serious shootings, stabbings and bludgeonings. He investigates any
questionable or suspicious death not readily explained by a victim’s age or
medical condition. Overdoses, seizures, suicides, accidental falls,
drownings, crib deaths, autoerotic strangulations—all receive the attention
of the same detective who has, at any given moment, case files for three
open homicides on his desk. In Baltimore, investigations of all shootings
involving police officers are conducted by homicide detectives rather than
internal affairs men; a sergeant and a squad of detectives are assigned to
probe every such incident and present a comprehensive report to the
departmental brass and the state’s attorney’s office the following morning.
Any threat on any police officer, state’s attorney or public official is
channeled through the homicide unit, as is any report of an attempt to
intimidate a state’s witness.
And there is more. The homicide unit’s proven ability to investigate any
incident and then document that investigation means that it is likely to be
called on to handle politically sensitive investigations: a drowning at a city
swimming pool where civil liability might result, a series of harassing
phone calls to the mayor’s chief of staff, a lengthy probe of a statelegislator’s bizarre claim that he was abducted by mysterious enemies. In
Baltimore, the general rule is that if something looks like a shitstorm,
smells like a shitstorm and tastes like a shitstorm, it goes to homicide. The
headquarters food chain demands it.
Consider:
Commanding the homicide unit’s two shifts of eighteen detectives and
detective sergeants are a pair of long-suffering lieutenants who answer to
the captain in charge of the Crimes Against Persons section. The captain,
who wishes to retire with a major’s pension, does not want his name
associated with anything that gives pain to the colonel in charge of the
Criminal Investigation Division. That is not just because the colonel is well
liked, intelligent and black, and stands a good chance of getting kicked
upstairs to a deputy commissioner’s post or higher in a city with a new
black mayor and a majority black population that has little faith in, or
regard for, its police department. The colonel is also shielded from pain
because whatever may arouse his displeasure requires only a brief elevator
ride before it reaches the attention of Yahweh himself, Deputy
Commissioner for Operations Ronald J. Mullen, who sits like a colossus
astride the Baltimore Police Department, demanding to know everything
about anything five minutes after it happens.
To mid-level supervisors, the deputy is simply the Great White Mullen,
a man whose consistent escalation in rank began after a brief stint in
Southwestern District patrol and continued unabated until he came to rest
on the eighth floor of headquarters. It is there that Mullen has made his
home for nearly a decade as the department’s second-in-command, secured
in his post by unswerving caution, good political sense and genuine
administrative gifts, yet denied the police commissioner’s office because he
is white in a city that is not. The result is that commissioners have come and
gone, but Ronald Mullen remains to keep track of who put which skeletons
in which closet. Every link in the chain, from sergeant on up, can tell you
that the deputy knows much of what goes on in the department and can
guess most of the rest. With one phone call, he can have what he doesn’t
know and can’t guess reduced to a memorandum and brought upstairs
before lunch. Deputy Commissioner Mullen is therefore a pain in the ass to
street police everywhere and an invaluable resource to Police
Commissioner Edward J. Tilghman, a veteran cop who spent three decades
amassing enough political capital to warrant appointment by his mayor to afive-year term. And, in a one-party town such as Baltimore, the mayor’s
office at City Hall is a heaven-kissed summit, a place of unfettered political
power currently occupied by one Kurt L. Schmoke, a black, Yale-educated
incumbent blessed with an overwhelmingly Democratic, overwhelmingly
black metropolis. Naturally, the commissioner is only permitted to breathe
air after first responding to the needs of the mayor, who can better
contemplate reelection when His police department causes Him no
humiliation or scandal, serves Him in whatever manner He sees fit, and
fights crime for the common good, in approximately that order.
Underneath this towering pyramid of authority squats the homicide
detective, laboring in anonymity over some bludgeoned prostitute or shot-
to-shit narcotics trafficker until one day the phone bleats twice and the body
on the ground is that of an eleven-year-old girl, an all-city athlete, a retired
priest, or some out-of-state tourist who wandered into the projects with a
Nikon around his neck.
Red balls. Murders that matter.
In this town, a detective lives or dies on the holy-shit cases that make it
clear who runs the city and what they want from their police department.
Majors, colonels and deputy commissioners who never uttered a word when
bodies were falling all over Lexington Terrace in the summer drug war of
’86 are now leaning over the shoulder of a detective sergeant, checking the
fine print. The deputy wants to be briefed. The mayor needs an update.
Channel 11 is on line 2. Some asshole from the Evening Sun is on hold for
Landsman. Who’s this guy Pellegrini working the case? New guy? Do we
trust him? Does he know what he’s doing? Do you need more men? More
overtime? You do understand that this thing is a priority, right?
In 1987, two parking attendants were murdered at 4:00 A.M. in the
garage of the Hyatt Hotel at the Inner Harbor—the glittering waterfront
development on which Baltimore has pinned its future—and by early
afternoon the governor of Maryland was barking loudly at the police
commissioner. An impatient man given to sudden, spectacular histrionics,
William Donald Schaefer is generally regarded to be the most consistently
annoyed governor in the nation. Elected to Maryland’s highest office in no
small part because of the restored harbor’s symbolic appeal, Schaefer made
it clear in a brief phone call that people are not to be killed at the Inner
Harbor without his permission and that this crime would be solved instantly
—which, in fact, it pretty much was.A red-ball case can mean twenty-hour days and constant reports to the
entire chain of command; it can become a special detail, with detectives
pulled out of the regular rotation and other cases put on indefinite hold. If
the effort results in an arrest, then the detective, his sergeant, and his shift
lieutenant can rest easy until the next major case, knowing that their
captain’s ear will not be gnawed upon by the colonel, who is no longer
worried about turning his back on the deputy, who at this very moment is on
the phone to City Hall telling Hizzoner that all is well in the harbor town.
But a red-ball case that won’t go down creates the opposite momentum,
with colonels kicking majors kicking captains until a detective and his
squad sergeant are covering themselves with office reports, explaining why
someone the colonel thinks is a suspect was never questioned further about
some incoherent statement, or why a tip from this brain-dead informant was
discounted, or why the technicians weren’t ordered to dust their own
assholes for fingerprints.
A homicide man survives by learning to read the chain of command the
way a Gypsy reads tea leaves. When the brass is asking questions, he makes
himself indispensable with the answers. When they’re looking for a reason
to reach down somebody’s throat, he puts together a report so straight
they’ll think he sleeps with a copy of the general orders. And when they’re
simply asking for a piece of meat to hang on the wall, he learns how to
make himself invisible. If a detective has enough moves to still be standing
after the occasional red ball, the department gives him some credit for
brains and leaves him alone so he can go back to answering the phone and
staring at bodies.
And there is much to see, beginning with the bodies battered by two-by-
fours and baseball bats, or bludgeoned with tire irons and cinder blocks.
Bodies with gaping wounds from carving knives or from shotguns fired so
close that the shell wadding is lodged deep in the wounds. Bodies in public
housing project stairwells, with the hypodermic still in their forearm and
that pathetic look of calm on their faces; bodies pulled out of the harbor
with reluctant blue crabs clinging to hands and feet. Bodies in basements,
bodies in alleys, bodies in beds, bodies in the trunk of a Chrysler with out-
of-state tags, bodies on gurneys behind a blue curtain in the University
Hospital emergency room, with tubes and catheters still poking out of the
carcasses to mock medicine’s best arguments. Bodies and pieces of bodies
that fell from balconies, from rooftops, from marine terminal loadingcranes. Bodies crushed by heavy machinery, suffocated by carbon
monoxide or suspended by a pair of sweatsocks from the top of a Central
District holding cell. Bodies on crib mattresses surrounded by stuffed
animals, tiny bodies in the arms of grieving mothers who can’t understand
that there is no reason, that the baby just stopped breathing air.
In the winter, the detective stands in water and ash and smells that
unmistakable odor as firefighters pry rubble off the bodies of children left
behind when a bedroom space heater shorted. In the summer, he stands in a
third-floor apartment with no windows and bad ventilation, watching the
ME’s attendants move the bloated wreck of an eighty-six-year-old retiree
who died in bed and stayed there until neighbors could no longer stand the
smell. He steps back when they roll the poor soul, knowing that the torso is
ripe and ready to burst and knowing, too, that the stench is going to be in
the fibers of his clothes and on the hairs of his nose for the rest of the day.
He sees the drownings that follow the first warm spring days and the
senseless bar shootings that are a rite of the first July heat wave. In early
fall, when the leaves turn and the schools open their doors, he spends a few
days at Southwestern, or Lake Clifton, or some other high school where
seventeen-year-old prodigies come to class with loaded .357s, then end the
school day by shooting off a classmate’s fingers in the faculty parking lot.
And on select mornings, all year long, he stands near the door of a tiled
room in the basement of a state office building at Penn and Lombard,
watching trained pathologists disassemble the dead.
For each body, he gives what he can afford to give and no more. He
carefully measures out the required amount of energy and emotion, closes
the file and moves on to the next call. And even after years of calls and
bodies and crime scenes and interrogations, a good detective still answers
the phone with the stubborn, unyielding belief that if he does his job, the
truth is always knowable.
A homicide detective endures.
MONDAY, JANUARY 18
The Big Man sits with his back to the green metal bulkhead that separates
the homicide and robbery offices, staring abstractedly at the city’s skyline
through the corner window. His left hand cradles a glass mug in the shape
of a globe, filled to the Arctic Circle with brown bile from the very bottom
of the office coffeepot. On the desk in front of him is a thick red binder withthe notation H8152 stamped on the front cover. He turns away from the
window and stares at the binder with malevolence. The binder stares back.
It is a four-to-twelve shift, and for Donald Worden—the Big Man, the
Bear, the only surviving natural police detective in America—it is the first
day back from a long weekend that did nothing to change his disposition.
The rest of his squad senses this and gives him wide berth, venturing into
the coffee room only on errands.
“Hey, Donald,” offers Terry McLarney during one such sortie. “How
was the weekend?”
Worden shrugs at his sergeant.
“Did you do anything?”
“No,” says Worden.
“Okay,” says McLarney. “So much for small talk.”
The Monroe Street shooting did this to him, stranding him at a corner
desk in the coffee room like some iron-bottom dreadnought run aground in
the shallows, waiting for a tide that might never come.
Five weeks old and no closer to a resolution than the morning after the
murder, the death of John Randolph Scott in an alley off West Baltimore’s
Monroe Street remains the police department’s first priority. Reports written
by Worden and his partner are copied not to his sergeant and lieutenant, as
with any other investigation, but to the administrative lieutenant and the
captain who commands Crimes Against Persons. From there, the reports
travel down the hall to the colonel, then to Deputy Commissioner Mullen,
two floors above.
The reports suggest little that can be called progress. And in every
conversation with a superior, a sense of paranoia is palpable. Donald
Worden can almost feel the department’s chain of command rustling
nervously. In Worden’s mind, too, the Monroe Street case is a tinderbox,
waiting only for the right community activist or storefront preacher to grab
hold of it and scream racism or police brutality or cover-up loud enough
and long enough for the mayor or the police commissioner to start calling
for heads. Worden often finds himself wondering why it hasn’t happened
yet.
Looking west out the coffee room window, Worden watches the winter
sky fade to dark blue as the pink-orange light of the falling sun slips behind
the skyline. The detective finishes his first cup of coffee, lumbers over to
the metal coat rack and pulls a cigar from the inside pocket of a beigeovercoat. His brand is Backwoods, a mean, black cigar sold at fine 7-
Elevens everywhere.
A thin curl of acrid smoke follows Worden as he walks back to the desk
and opens the red binder.
H8152
Homicide/Police Shooting
John Randolph Scott B/M/22
3022 Garrison Boulevard, Apt. 3
CC# 87-7L-13281
“What a piece of shit this turned out to be,” Worden says softly, leafing
through the office reports at the front of the file. Pushing back in his chair,
he props one leg on the desk and opens a second binder to a series of color
photographs, stapled two to a page on a set of manila dividers.
John Randolph Scott lies on his back in the center of the alley. His face
is smooth and unworn; he looks younger than his twenty-two years.
Locked, empty eyes stare south toward the red brick side of a rowhouse.
His clothes are those of any kid on any corner: black leather jacket, blue
jeans, beige shirt, white tennis shoes. Another photo shows the victim rolled
on his side, the rubber-gloved hand of a detective pointing to the small hole
in the back of the leather jacket. An entrance wound, with the
corresponding exit found in the left center chest. Above the young man’s
eye is a bloody contusion caused by his fall to the concrete.
The medical examiner later determined that the bullet that killed John
Randolph Scott fully penetrated his heart at a slightly downward angle,
consistent with the downward slope of the alley in which he was found.
Scott died almost instantly, the pathologists agreed, shot in the back while
fleeing from officers of the Baltimore Police Department.
In its earliest hours, the Scott case was regarded not as a murder but as a
police-involved shooting—a bad police shooting that would require some
careful writing if a cop wasn’t going to be torn apart by a grand jury, but
nothing that anyone was going to start calling a crime.
The victim was one of two young men in a Dodge Colt that a two-man
Central District car made for stolen and chased from Martin Luther King
Boulevard down I-170 and then onto Raynor Avenue, where Scott and a
twenty-one-year-old companion bailed out and ran in separate directions
through the alleys of the rowhouse ghetto. As the two Central uniforms
jumped from the radio car to begin a foot chase, one of the officers, twenty-seven-year-old Brian Pedrick, stumbled and fired one shot from his service
revolver. Pedrick later told investigators that the shot was an accident, a
wayward round fired when he lost his footing while staggering from his car.
Pedrick believed that his gun was pointed down and that the bullet struck
the asphalt in front of him; in any event, the round seemed to have no effect
on the suspect he was chasing, who disappeared into the labyrinth of back
alleys. Pedrick lost sight of the kid, but by then other cars from the Central,
Western and Southern districts were rolling through the nearby side streets
and alleys.
Minutes later, a Central District sergeant called for an ambulance and a
homicide unit as he stood over a body in an alley off Monroe Street, about
three blocks from where Pedrick had fired his one round. Was this a police-
involved shooting? the dispatcher asked. No, said the sergeant. But then
Pedrick himself walked up to the scene and admitted letting one go. The
sergeant keyed his mike again. Correction, he said, this is police-involved.
Worden and his partner, Rick James, arrived at the scene minutes later,
looked over the dead man, talked with the Central District sergeant and then
inspected Pedrick’s service revolver. One round spent. The patrolman was
relieved of the weapon and taken to the homicide unit, where he
acknowledged that he had fired one shot but declined to make any other
statement until he had talked with a police union lawyer. Worden knew
what that meant.
A union lawyer has a standard response to a detective’s request to
interview a police officer as part of a criminal investigation. If ordered to do
so, the officer will submit a report explaining his actions during a shooting
incident; otherwise, he will make no statement. Because when such a report
is written in response to a direct order, it cannot constitute a voluntary
statement and therefore cannot be used in court against the officer. In this
case, the state’s attorney on duty that night refused to order the report and,
as a consequence of the legal impasse, the investigation fixed itself on an
obvious course: proving that Officer Brian Pedrick—a five-year veteran
with no prior record of brutality or excessive force—had shot a fleeing man
in the back with his service revolver.
For twelve hours, the Monroe Street investigation was certainty and
cohesion, and it would have remained so except for one critical fact: Officer
Pedrick did not shoot John Randolph Scott.On the morning after the shooting, the medical examiner’s attendants
undressed Scott’s body and found a spent .38 slug still lodged in the bloody
clothing. That bullet was compared by the ballistics lab later that afternoon,
but it could not be matched with Pedrick’s revolver. In fact, the bullet that
killed Scott was a 158-grain roundnose, a common type of Smith & Wesson
ammunition that hadn’t been used by the police department in more than a
decade.
Worden and several other detectives then returned to the scene of the
pursuit and in daylight carefully searched the alley where Pedrick was
believed to have fired his weapon. Picking through trash in that alley off
Raynor Avenue, they found a mark in the pavement that appeared to have
lead residue from a bullet ricochet. The detectives followed the likely
trajectory of the slug across the alley and came to an adjacent lot where,
incredibly, a resident was cleaning debris on that very morning. Of all the
trash-strewn lots in all the ghettos in all the world, Worden thought, this
guy’s gotta be cleaning ours. Just as the detectives were about to begin
emptying every one of the half-dozen trash bags filled by West Baltimore’s
last Good Samaritan, they discovered the spent .38 slug, still partially
buried in the dirt lot. Ballistics then matched that bullet to Brian Pedrick’s
weapon.
But if Pedrick wasn’t the shooter, who was?
Worden had no taste for the obvious answer. He was a cop and he had
spent his adult life in the brotherhood of cops—in station houses and radio
cars, in courthouse corridors and district lockups. He didn’t want to believe
that someone wearing the uniform could be so stupid as to shoot someone
and then run away, leaving the body in a back alley like any other
murdering bastard. And yet he couldn’t turn away from the fact that John
Randolph Scott was killed with a .38 slug while running from men with .38
revolvers. In any other investigation, there would be no debate as to where
and how a homicide detective should begin. In any other case, a detective
would start with the men who had the guns.
Worden being Worden, he had done precisely that, compelling nearly
two dozen police from three districts to submit their service revolvers to
evidence control in exchange for replacement weapons. But for each .38
submitted, a corresponding ballistics report indicated that the fatal bullet
had not come from this officer’s duty weapon. Another dead end.Was a cop carrying a secondary weapon, another .38 that had since been
thrown off some Canton pier? Or maybe the kid was running from police
and tried to steal another car, only to get himself shot by some irate civilian
who then disappeared into the night. That was a long shot, Worden had to
admit, but in this neighborhood nothing was impossible. A more likely
scenario had the kid getting aced with a gun of his own, a .38 taken off him
in a struggle with an arresting officer. That could explain why the spent
bullet wasn’t department issue, just as it could explain the torn buttons.
Worden and Rick James had recovered four of them at or near the
victim’s body. One button appeared to have nothing to do with the victim;
three were determined to be from the dead man’s shirt. Two of those buttons
were found near the body and were bloodied; the third was found near the
mouth of the alley. To Worden and James both, the torn buttons indicated
that the victim had been grabbed in a struggle, and the presence of the
button near the mouth of the alley suggested that the struggle had begun
only a few feet from where the victim fell. More than a straight shooting by
a civilian suspect, that scenario suggested an attempted street arrest, an
effort to grab or halt the victim.
For Donald Worden, the death of John Randolph Scott had become a
dirty piece of business, with each possible outcome more unsettling than the
last.
If the murder remained unsolved, it would resemble a departmental
cover-up. But if a cop was indicted, Worden and James would become, as
the men responsible for the prosecution, pariahs to the people in patrol.
Already, the police union lawyers were telling members not to talk to
homicide, that the Crimes Against Persons section was synonymous with
IID. How the hell would they work murders with patrol against them? But
in some ways the third alternative, the slim possibility of civilian
involvement—that John Randolph Scott was shot by a local while trying to
break into a home or steal a second car to elude the pursuing officers—was
the worst of all. Worden reasoned that if he ever came up with a civilian
suspect, the brass would go out of their minds trying to sell it to the city’s
political leadership, not to mention the powers-that-be in the black
community. Well, Mr. Mayor, we thought the white officers chasing Mr.
Scott may have done it, but now we’re pretty much convinced that a black
guy from the 1000 block of Fulton Street is responsible.
Yeah. Sure. No problem.Twenty-five years in the Baltimore Police Department and Donald
Worden was now being asked to put the crown on his career by solving a
case that could put cops in prison. In the beginning, the notion had seemed
abhorrent—Worden was as much or more of a street police than any man
out there. He had gone downtown after more than a decade in the
Northwest District’s operations unit and then only reluctantly. And now,
because of this thieving kid with the bullethole in his back, patrolmen in
three districts were idling their radio cars side by side, hood to trunk, in
vacant parking lots, talking in hushed tones about a man who was on the
street when they were hurling spitballs in grade school. Who the fuck is this
guy Worden? Is he really gonna go after a police on this Monroe Street
thing? He’s gonna try and fuck over another police because of some dead
yo? What is he, a rat or something?
“Uh-oh, Worden be looking at that nasty file.”
Worden’s partner stands in the doorway of the coffee room, holding a
piece of scratch paper. Rick James is ten years younger than Donald
Worden and has neither his instincts nor his savvy, but then again, few
people in this world do. Worden works with the younger detective because
James can manage a homicide scene and write a good, coherent report, and
for all his virtues, Donald Worden would rather eat his gun than sit at a
typewriter for two hours. In his better moments, Worden regards James as a
worthy project, an apprentice on whom to bestow the lessons of a quarter
century of policing.
The Big Man looks up slowly and sees the scrap paper in the younger
man’s hand.
“What’s that?”
“It’s a call, babe.”
“We’re not supposed to be taking calls. We’re detailed.”
“Terry says we should go on it.”
“What is it?”
“Shooting.”
“I don’t handle homicides anymore,” says Worden dryly. “Just give me
a fucked-up police shooting any day.”
“C’mon, babe, let’s go make some money.”
Worden downs the last of his coffee, throws the remains of the cigar
into a can, and for a second or two allows himself to believe that there may
just be life after Monroe Street. He walks to the coat rack.“Don’t forget your gun, Donald.”
The Big Man smiles for the first time.
“I sold my gun. Pawned it for some power tools down on Baltimore
Street. Where’s this here shooting?”
“Greenmount. Thirty-eight hundred block.”
Detective Sergeant Terrence Patrick McLarney watches the two men
prepare to leave and nods his head in satisfaction. It’s been more than a
month since the Monroe Street shooting and McLarney wants his two men
back in the rotation, handling calls. The trick is to do it gradually, so as not
to suggest to the chain of command that the Monroe Street detail is in fact
on its last legs. With any luck, McLarney figures, Worden will catch a
murder with this call and the admin lieutenant will get off his ass about the
Scott case.
“Detail leaving, sergeant,” says Worden.
Inside the elevator, Rick James fingers the car keys and stares at his
blurred reflection in the metal doors. Worden watches the indicator lights.
“McLarney’s happy, ain’t he?”
Worden says nothing.
“You’re a bear and a half today, Donald.”
“You drive, bitch.”
Rick James rolls his eyes and looks at his partner. He sees a six-foot-
four, 240-pound polar bear masquerading as a gap-toothed forty-eight-year-
old man with deep blue eyes, a rapidly receding line of white hair and rising
blood pressure. Yes, he is a bear, but the best part of working with Donald
Worden is easily understood: The man is a natural policeman.
“I’m just a poor, dumb white boy from Hampden, trying to make his
way through this world and into the next,” Worden would often say by way
of introduction. And on paper, he appeared to be exactly that: Baltimore
born and bred, he had a high school education, a few years of navy service,
and a police service record of impressive length but with no greater rank
than patrolman or detective. On the street, however, Worden was one of the
most instinctive, inspired cops in the city. He had spent over a quarter of a
century in the department and knew Baltimore like few others ever would.
Twelve years in the Northwest District, three in escape and apprehension,
another eight working in the robbery unit, and now three years in homicide.
He hadn’t come to the unit without second thoughts. Time and again,
squad sergeants in homicide had urged him to make the switch, but Wordenwas a man of the old school and loyalty counted for a lot. The same
lieutenant who brought him to the robbery unit wanted to keep him, and
Worden felt beholden. And his relationship with his partner, Ron Grady—
an unlikely match between a would-be hillbilly from North Baltimore’s all-
white enclave of Hampden and a beefy black cop from the city’s west side
—was another reason to stay put. They were a salt-and-pepper team of
legendary proportions and Worden never hesitated to remind Rick James
and everyone else in homicide that Grady was the only man he could ever
truly call his partner.
But by early 1985, working robberies had become a numbing, repetitive
existence. Worden had run through hundreds of investigations—banks,
armored cars, downtown holdups, commercial jobs. In the old days, he
would tell younger detectives, a cop could go after a better class of thieves;
now a Charles Street bank job was more likely to be the impulse of some
nodding addict than the work of a professional. In the end, the job itself
made the decision for him: Worden can still vividly remember the morning
he arrived at the office to find a report of an Eastern District incident on his
desk, a liquor store robbery from Greenmount Avenue. The report was filed
as robbery with a deadly weapon, which meant the incident required a
follow-up by a downtown detective. Worden read the narrative and learned
that a group of kids had grabbed a six-pack and run from the store. The
counterman tried to chase them and got hit with a piece of a brick for his
trouble. It wasn’t felony robbery; hell, it wasn’t anything that couldn’t have
been handled by a district uniform. For Worden, who had been a robbery
detective for almost eight years, that incident report was the end of the line.
He went to the captain the next day with the transfer request to homicide.
Worden’s reputation preceded him across the hall and during the next
two years he proved not only that he was ready for murders but that he was
the centerpiece of McLarney’s squad, no small thing in a five-man unit that
included two other men with twenty-year histories. Rick James had
transferred to homicide in July 1985, only three months before Worden, and
James quickly sized up the situation and paired up with the Big Man,
following him so closely that other detectives gave him grief about it. But
Worden clearly enjoyed the role of an elder sage and James was willing to
hold up his end by doing a good crime scene and writing the necessary
reports. If Worden taught him half of what he knew before taking that
pension, Rick James would be in homicide a long, long time.The bad thing about working with Worden was the black moods, the
sullen brooding because he was still working for a patrolman’s wage when
he should be taking a pension and living a life of leisure as some security
consultant or home improvement contractor. Worden was strangely self-
conscious that he was still out there running down ghetto murders when
most of the men who came on with him were retired or working a second
career; the few that remained on the force were ending their days in the
districts as desk sergeants or turnkeys, or in the headquarters security
booths listening to the Orioles drop a double-header on a transistor radio,
waiting out another year or two for a higher pension. All around him,
younger men were getting out and moving on to better things.
More often than not these days, Worden found himself talking seriously
about packing it in. But a large part of him didn’t even want to think about
retirement; the department had been his home since 1962—his arrival in
homicide marked the last curl in a long, graceful arc. For three years,
Worden’s work in the unit had sustained and even revived him.
The Big Man took particular delight in his ongoing effort to break in the
younger detectives in his squad, Rick James and Dave Brown. James was
coming along all right, but in Worden’s mind Brown could go either way.
Worden never hesitated to press the point, subjecting the younger detective
to a training regimen best characterized as education-by-insult.
The least experienced man in the squad, Dave Brown tolerated the Big
Man’s bluster—in large part because he knew Worden genuinely cared
whether Brown stayed a detective, in smaller part because there was no real
choice in the matter. The relationship between the two men was perfectly
captured in a color photograph taken by a crime lab tech at a murder in
Cherry Hill. In the foreground was an earnest Dave Brown, collecting
discarded beer cans near the shooting scene in the vain and excessively
optimistic hope that they might have anything at all to do with the killing.
In the background, sitting on the front stoop of a public housing unit, was
Donald Worden, watching the younger detective with what appears to be a
look of unequivocal disgust. Dave Brown liberated the photograph from the
case file and took it home as a memento. It was the Big Man that Brown
had come to know and love. Cantankerous, annoyed, ever critical. A last,
lonely centurion who sees both his affliction and his challenge in a younger
generation of menials and incompetents.The photograph showed the Big Man at the height of his powers:
abrasive, confident, the nettled conscience of every younger or less
experienced detective on the shift. And, of course, the Cherry Hill case
went down, with Worden getting the tip that led to the murder weapon at
the home of the shooter’s girlfriend. But that was when Worden still felt
some delight at being a homicide detective. That was before Monroe Street.
Climbing into a Cavalier on the mezzanine level, James decides to risk
conversation one more time.
“If this is a murder,” he says, “I’ll be the primary.”
Worden looks at him. “You don’t want to see if someone’s been locked
up first?”
“No, babe. I need the money.”
“You’re a whore.”
“Yeah, babe.”
James rolls the car down the garage ramp, over to Fayette, then north on
Gay Street to Greenmount, preoccupied with the complex computations of
anticipated overtime. Two hours at the scene, three hours of interrogation,
another three for paperwork, four more for the autopsy; James thinks about
how sweet twelve hours of time-and-a-half will look on his pay stub.
But it is not a murder on Greenmount; it isn’t even a straight shooting.
Both detectives know that after listening to a sixteen-year-old witness rattle
through an incoherent three-minute monologue.
“Whoa, start from the beginning. Slowly.”
“Derrick came running in …”
“Derrick who?”
“That’s my brother.”
“How old is he?”
“Seventeen. He come running through the front door and upstairs. My
older brother went up and found him shot and called nine-one-one. Derrick
said he was at the bus stop and got shot. That’s all he said.”
“He didn’t know who shot him?”
“No, he say he just got shot.”
Worden takes the flashlight from James and walks outside with a
patrolman.
“Are you the first officer?”
“No,” says the uniform. “That’s Rodriguez.”
“Where is he?”“He went to shock-trauma with your victim.”
Worden shoots the patrolman a look, then walks back toward the front
door of the house and turns the flashlight on the floor of the porch. No
blood trail. No blood on the door handle. The detective scans the brick front
of the rowhouse with the light. No blood. No fresh damage. One hole, but
too even to be from a bullet. Probably an old drill hole for a light fixture.
Worden takes the flashlight back down the front walk toward the street.
He walks back inside the house and checks the rooms upstairs. Still no
blood. The detective walks back downstairs and listens to James
questioning the sixteen-year-old.
“Where’d your brother run to when he came in the house?” Worden
interrupts.
“Upstairs.”
“There’s no blood upstairs.”
The kid looks at his shoes.
“What’s going on here?” says Worden, pressing him.
“We cleaned it up,” the kid says.
“You cleaned it up?”
“Uh-huh.”
“Oh,” says Worden, rolling his eyes. “Let’s go back upstairs then.”
The kid takes the stairs two at a time, then turns into the clutter and
disarray of a teenager’s room, replete with pinups of models in bikinis and
posters of New York rappers in designer sweats. Without further prompting,
the sixteen-year-old pulls two bloodstained sheets from a hamper.
“Where were those?”
“On the bed.”
“On the bed?”
“We turned over the mattress.”
Worden flips the mattress. A red-brown stain covers a good quarter of
the fabric.
“What jacket was your brother wearing when he came in?”
“The gray one.”
Worden picks up a gray puff jacket from a chair and checks it carefully,
inside and out. No blood. He goes to the bedroom closet and checks every
other winter coat, throwing each on the bed as James shakes his head
slowly.“Here’s what happened,” says James. “You were in here playing around
with a gun and your brother got shot. Now if you start telling the truth,
you’re not going to get locked up. Where’s the gun?”
“What gun?”
“Jesus Christ. Where’s the goddamn gun?”
“Don’t know about no gun.”
“Your brother has a gun. Let’s just get the gun out of the way.”
“Derrick got shot at the bus stop.”
“The fuck he did,” says James, simmering. “He was fucking around in
here and you or your brother or someone else shot him by accident.
Where’s the fucking gun?”
“Ain’t no gun.”
Classic, thinks Worden, looking at the kid. Truly classic. A prime
example of the Rule Number One of the guidebook of death investigation,
the page 1 entry in a detective’s lexicon:
Everyone lies.
Murderers, stickup artists, rapists, drug dealers, drug users, half of all
major-crime witnesses, politicians of all persuasions, used car salesmen,
girlfriends, wives, ex-wives, line officers above the rank of lieutenant,
sixteen-year-old high school students who accidentally shoot their older
brother and then hide the gun—to a homicide detective, the earth spins on
an axis of denial in an orbit of deceit. Hell, sometimes the police themselves
are no different. For the last six weeks, Donald Worden has listened to a
long series of statements by men wearing the uniform in which he has spent
a lifetime, listened to them as they tried to get their stories straight and
explain how they couldn’t possibly have been anywhere near that alley off
Monroe Street.
James begins moving toward the bedroom door. “You tell us what you
want,” he says bitterly. “When your brother dies, we’ll be back to charge
you with the murder.”
The kid remains mute, and the two detectives follow the uniform out the
front door. Worden holds his temper until the Cavalier is rolling back down
Greenmount.
“Who the hell is this guy Rodriguez?”
“I guess you’re going to have something to say to him.”
“I’m gonna have a lot to say. The first officer to arrive protects the
crime scene. And what do they do? They go to the hospital, they go toheadquarters, they go to lunch and let the people pick the scene apart. What
good he was gonna do at the hospital, I don’t know.”
But Rodriguez isn’t at the hospital. And there is no satisfaction for
Worden in a brief discussion with the victim’s distracted mother, who sits
with two other children in the trauma unit’s waiting room, clutching a
tissue.
“I don’t know, honestly,” she tells the detectives. “I was sitting with my
other son, watching TV, and I heard a noise, like a firecracker or the sound
of glass breaking. Derrick’s brother James went upstairs and said Derrick
had been coming home from work and got shot. I told him not to play like
that.”
Worden interrupts.
“Mrs. Allen, I’m gonna be frank with you. Your son was shot in his
room, more than likely by accident. Except for the bed, there was no blood
anywhere, not even on the jacket he was wearing when he came in.”
The woman looks at the detective blankly. Worden continues,
explaining her children’s effort to conceal the shooting scene and the
probability that the handgun that has sent her son to surgery is still in the
house.
“No one is talking about charging anyone. We’re from homicide and if
it’s an accidental shooting, then we’re wasting our time and we just need to
get it straightened out.”
The woman nods in vague agreement. Worden asks if she would be
willing to call home and ask her children to turn over the weapon.
“They can leave it on the porch and lock the door if they want,” Worden
says. “We’re just interested in getting the gun out of the house.”
The mother abdicates.
“I’d rather you do that,” she says.
Worden walks into the hall and finds Rick James, who is talking with a
medical technician. Derrick Allen is critical but stable; in all probability, he
will live to fight another day. And Officer Rodriguez, says James, is back at
homicide, writing his report.
“I’ll drop you at the office. If I go back now I’m going to jump in
someone’s shit,” says Worden. “I’ll take another trip by the house for the
gun. Don’t ask me why I should care whether they keep the fucking thing or
not.”A half hour later, Worden is rechecking Derrick Allen’s bedroom and
finds a hole in a back window and a spent bullet on an outside rear porch.
He shows the slug and the window to the sixteen-year-old brother.
The kid shrugs. “I guess Derrick got shot in his room.”
“Where’s the gun?”
“Don’t know about no gun.”
It is a God-given truth: Everyone lies. And this most basic of axioms
has three corollaries:
A. Murderers lie because they have to.
B. Witnesses and other participants lie because they think they have to.
C. Everyone else lies for the sheer joy of it, and to uphold a general
principle that under no circumstances do you provide accurate information
to a cop.
Derrick’s brother is living proof of the second corollary. A witness lies
to protect friends and relatives, even those who have wantonly shed blood.
He lies to deny his involvement in drugs. He lies to hide the fact that he has
prior arrests or that he is secretly homosexual, or that he even knew the
victim. Most of all, he lies to distance himself from the murder and the
possibility that he may one day have to testify in court. In Baltimore, a cop
asks you what you saw and the requisite reply, an involuntary motor skill
bred into the urban population over generations, is delivered with a slow
shake of the head and an averted stare:
“I ain’t seen nothing.”
“You were standing next to the guy.”
“I ain’t seen nothing.”
Everyone lies.
Worden gives the kid one last, steady look.
“Your brother was shot in this room with a gun that he was playing
with. Why don’t we get that gun out of the house?”
The teenager barely misses a beat.
“I don’t know about no gun.”
Worden shakes his head. He could call for the crime lab and spend a
couple hours tearing the place apart in a search for the damn thing; if it
were a murder, he’d be doing just that. But for an accidental shooting,
what’s the point? Pull a gun out of this house and there’ll be another in its
place by the end of the week.“Your brother’s in the hospital,” say Worden. “Doesn’t that mean
anything to you?”
The kid looks at the floor.
Fine, thinks Worden. I tried. I gave it a shot. So now keep the goddamn
gun as a souvenir, and when you’ve shot yourself in the leg or put a round
through little sister, you can call us again. Why, thinks Worden, should I
waste time on your bullshit when there are people waiting in line to lie to
me? Why hunt for your $20 pistol when I’ve got the quagmire that is
Monroe Street on my desk?
Worden drives back to the office empty-handed, his mood even darker
than before.
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 20
On the long wall of the coffee room hangs a large rectangle of white paper,
running most of the room’s length. It is covered by acetate and divided by
black rules into six sections.
Above the three right-hand sections is a letterplate bearing the name of
Lieutenant Robert Stanton, who commands the homicide unit’s second
shift. To the immediate left, below the name of Lieutenant Gary D’Addario,
are the three remaining sections. Underneath the nameplates of the two
lieutenants, affixed to the top of each section, is the name of a detective
sergeant: McLarney, Landsman and Nolan for D’Addario’s shift: Childs,
Lamartina and Barrick for Stanton’s command.
Below each sergeant’s nameplate are brief listings of dead people, the
first homicide victims of the year’s first month. The names of victims in
closed cases are written in black felt marker; the names of victims in open
investigations, in red. To the left of each victim’s name is a case number—
88001 for the year’s first murder, 88002 for the second, and so on. To the
right of each victim’s name is a letter or letters—A for Bowman, B for
Garvey, C for McAllister—which correspond to the names of the assigned
detectives listed at the bottom of each section.
A sergeant or lieutenant trying to match a homicide with its primary
detective, or the reverse, can scan the sections of the white rectangle and in
a matter of moments determine that Tom Pellegrini is working the murder
of Rudy Newsome. He can also determine, by noting that Newsome’s name
is in red ink, that the case is still open. For this reason, supervisors in thehomicide unit regard the white rectangle as an instrument necessary to
assure accountability and clerical precision. For this reason, too, detectives
in the unit regard the rectangle as an affliction, an unforgiving creation that
has endured far beyond the expectations of the now-retired sergeants and
long-dead lieutenants who created it. The detectives call it, simply, the
board.
In the time that it takes the coffeepot to fill, shift commander Lieutenant
Gary D’Addario—otherwise known to his men as Dee, LTD, or simply as
His Eminence—can approach the board as a pagan priest might approach
the temple of the sun god, scan the hieroglyphic scrawl of red and black
below his name, and determine who among his three sergeants has kept his
commandments and who has gone astray. He can further check the coded
letters beside the name of each case and make the same determination about
his fifteen detectives. The board reveals all: Upon its acetate is writ the
story of past and present. Who has grown fat on domestic murders
witnessed by half a dozen family members; who has starved on a drug
assassination in a vacant rowhouse. Who has reaped the bountiful harvest of
a murder-suicide complete with a posthumous note of confession; who has
tasted the bitter fruit of an unidentified victim, bound and gagged in the
trunk of an airport rental car.
The board that today greets the shift lieutenant is a wretched, bloody
piece of work, with most of the names etched beneath D’Addario’s
sergeants written in red. Stanton’s shift began the new year at midnight,
catching five murders in the early hours of January 1. Of those cases,
however, all but one were the result of drunken arguments and accidental
shootings, and all but one are in the black. Then, a week later, came the
shift change, with Stanton’s men going to daywork and D’Addario’s crew
taking over on the four-to-twelve and midnight shifts and catching their first
cases of the year. Nolan’s squad took the first murder for the shift on
January 10, a drug-related robbery in which the victim was found stabbed to
death in the back seat of a Dodge. McLarney’s squad picked up a whodunit
the same night when a middle-aged homosexual was shotgunned as he
opened his apartment door in lower Charles Village. Then Fahlteich caught
the first murder of the year for Landsman’s squad, a robbery beating in
Rognel Heights with no suspects, after which McAllister broke up the red
ink with an easy arrest on Dillon Street, where a fifteen-year-old white kid
was stabbed in the heart over a $20 drug debt.But the murders were all wide open the following week, with Eddie
Brown and Waltemeyer arriving at a Walbrook Junction apartment house to
find Kenny Vines stretched out on his stomach in a first-floor hallway, a red
puddle of wetness where his right eye used to be. Brown didn’t recognize
the corpse at first, though he actually knew the forty-eight-yearold Vines
from years back; hell, everyone who ever worked the west side knew
Kenny Vines. The owner of a Bloomingdale Road body shop, Vines had for
years been deep into numbers and stolen auto parts, but it was only when he
started to move a lot of cocaine that he began making serious enemies. The
Vines case was followed two nights later by Rudy Newsome and Roy
Johnson, the split decision for Landsman’s crew, which was followed in
turn by a double murder on Luzerne Street, where a gunman broke into a
stash house in a dispute over drug territory and began firing wildly, killing
two and wounding two more. Naturally, the survivors didn’t care to
remember much.
The grand total came to nine bodies in eight cases, with only one file
closed and another on the verge of a warrant, a solve rate so low that
D’Addario could be fairly described as one of the police department’s least
satisfied lieutenants.
“I can’t help but note, sir,” says McLarney, following his supervisor into
the coffee room, “as I’m sure you, in your infinite wisdom, have also
noticed …”
“Go on, my good sergeant.”
“… that there is a lot of red ink on our side of the board.”
“Yes, quite so,” says D’Addario, encouraging this pattern of courtly,
classical speech, a favored ploy that never fails to amuse his sergeants.
“A suggestion, sir?”
“You have my undivided attention, Sergeant McLarney.”
“Maybe it would look better if we put the open cases in black and the
closed ones in red,” McLarney says. “That would fool the bosses for a
while.”
“That’s one solution.”
“Of course,” adds McLarney, “we could also go out and lock some
people up.”
“That’s also a solution.”
McLarney laughs, but not too much. As a supervisor, Gary D’Addario is
generally regarded by his sergeants and detectives as a prince, a benevolentautocrat who asks only competence and loyalty. In return, he provides his
shift with unstinting support and sanctuary from the worst whims and
fancies of the command staff. A tall man with thinning tufts of silver-gray
hair and a quietly dignified manner, D’Addario is one of the last survivors
of the Italian caliphate that briefly ruled the department after a long Irish
dynasty. It was a respite that began with Frank Battaglia’s ascension to the
commissioner’s post and continued until membership in the Sons of Italy
was as much a prerequisite for elevation as the sergeant’s test. But the Holy
Roman Empire lasted less than four years; in 1985, the mayor
acknowledged the city’s changing demographics by dragging Battaglia into
a well-paid consultant’s position and giving the black community a firm
lock on the upper tiers of the police department.
If the outgoing tide stranded D’Addario in homicide as a lieutenant,
then the men under him owed much to affirmative action. Soft-spoken and
introspective, D’Addario was a rare breed of supervisor for a paramilitary
organization. He had learned long ago to suppress the first impulse of
command that calls for a supervisor to intimidate his men, charting their
every movement and riding them through investigations. In the districts,
that sort of behavior usually resulted from a new supervisor’s primitive
conclusion that the best way to avoid being perceived as weak was to
behave like a petty tyrant. Every district had a shift lieutenant or sector
sergeant who would demand explanatory Form 95s from people ten minutes
late to roll call, or scour the district’s holes at 4:00 A.M. in the hope of
finding some poor post officer sleeping in his radio car. Supervisors like
that either grew into their jobs or their best men ducked and covered long
enough to transfer to another sector.
Up in homicide, an authoritarian shift commander is even more likely to
be held in contempt by his detectives—men who would not, in fact, be on
the sixth floor of headquarters if they weren’t eighteen of the most self-
motivated cops in the department. In homicide, the laws of natural selection
apply: A cop who puts down enough cases stays, a cop who doesn’t is gone.
Given that basic truth, there isn’t much respect for the notion that a cop
shrewd enough to maneuver his way into homicide and then put together
forty or fifty cases somehow needs to have a shift commander’s finger in
his eye. Rank, of course, has it privileges, but a homicide supervisor who
exercises his divine right to chew ass on every conceivable occasion will inthe end create a shift of alienated sergeants and overly cautious detectives,
unwilling or incapable of acting on their own instincts.
Instead, and at some cost to his own career, Gary D’Addario gave his
men room to maneuver, providing a buffer against the captain and those
above him in the chain of command. His method carried considerable risk,
and the relationship between D’Addario and his captain had frayed around
the edges during the last four years. By contrast, Bob Stanton, the other
shift lieutenant, was a supervisor more to the captain’s liking. A buttoned-
down veteran of the narcotics unit handpicked by the captain to command
the second shift, Stanton ran a tighter ship, with sergeants exerting more
overt control over their men and detectives pressured to hold down the
overtime and court pay that lubricates the entire system. Stanton was a good
lieutenant and a sharp cop, but when compared with the alternative, his
frugality and by-the-book style were such that more than a few veterans on
his shift expressed an eagerness to join D’Addario’s crusade at the first
opportunity.
For the sergeants and detectives blessed by D’Addario’s benevolence,
the quid pro quo was both simple and obvious. They had to solve murders.
They had to solve enough murders to produce a clearance rate that would
vindicate His Eminence and his methods and thereby justify his benign and
glorious rule. In homicide, the clearance rate is the litmus test, the
beginning and end of all debate.
Which is reason enough for D’Addario to stare long and hard at the red
ink on his side of the board. Not only does the white rectangle offer ready
comparisons between detectives, it offers the same superficial comparison
between shifts. In that sense, the board—and the clearance rate it represents
—has divided Baltimore’s homicide guard into separate units, each shift
functioning independently of the other. Detectives old enough to have
experienced life before the board remember the homicide unit as more of a
single entity; detectives were willing to work cases that began or ended on
another shift, knowing that credit for clearances would be shared by the
entire unit. Created to promote cohesion and accountability, the board
instead left the two shifts—and each of the six squads—to compete against
each other in red and black ink for clearances, as if they were a pack of
double-knit salesmen moving marked-down cars for Luby’s Chevrolet.
The trend began long before Stanton’s arrival, but the lieutenants’
different styles helped to highlight the competition. And for the last severalyears, detectives from one shift had interacted with those from the other
only at the half-hour shift changes or on rare occasions when a detective
pulling overtime on a case needed an extra body from the working shift to
witness an interrogation or help kick down a door. The competition was
always understated, but soon even individual detectives found themselves
contemplating the white rectangle, silently computing clearance rates for
opposing squads or shifts. That, too, was ironic, because every detective in
the unit was willing to concede that the board was itself a flawed
measurement, as it represented only the number of homicides for the year.
A squad could spend three weeks of nightwork knee deep in police
shootings, questionable deaths, serious assaults, kidnappings, overdose
cases and every other kind of death investigation. Yet none of that would be
reflected in black and red ink.
Even with the murders themselves, much of what clears a case amounts
to pure chance. The vocabulary of the homicide unit recognizes two distinct
categories of homicides: whodunits and dunkers. Whodunits are genuine
mysteries; dunkers are cases accompanied by ample evidence and an
obvious suspect. Whodunits are best typified by crime scenes where a
detective is called to some godforsaken back alley to find a body and little
more. Dunkers are best typified by scenes at which the detective steps over
the body to meet the unrepentant husband, who has not bothered to change
his bloodied clothes and requires little prompting to admit that he stabbed
the bitch and would do so again given the chance. The distinction between
cases that require investigation and cases that require little more than
paperwork is understood and accepted by every man in the unit, and more
than one squad sergeant has accused another of rushing a detective out to a
call that sounded on the radio as if it were a domestic murder or, worse yet,
ducking a call that had all the markings of a well-executed drug slaying.
The board, of course, does not delineate between dunkers solved by
circumstance and whodunits solved by extended investigation: The ink is as
black for one as the other. As a consequence, the resulting politics of
whodunits and dunkers becomes part of the mind-set, so much so that
veteran detectives watching an old western on the office television will
always offer the same remark when gunfighters are shot down on frontier
streets crowded with God-fearing townsfolk:
“Yeah, bunk. There’s a dunker.”But dunkers had lately been few and far between for D’Addario’s shift,
and the lieutenant’s dependence on both the board and the clearance rate
had become even more acute in the wake of Worden’s investigation into the
Monroe Street shooting of John Scott. The captain had taken the
extraordinary step of removing both D’Addario and McLarney from the
chain of command, ordering Worden and James to report directly to the
administrative lieutenant. On one level, the decision to preempt McLarney
made sense because he was close to so many of the patrolmen in the
Western, some of whom were potential suspects in the murder. But
D’Addario had no divided allegiances, and after nine years in homicide he
had seen enough red balls to know the entire drill. The suggestion that he
continue to devote his time to routine matters rather than contend with a
sensitive investigation such as Monroe Street could only be taken as an
insult. Inevitably, D’Addario’s relations with the captain were now more
strained than ever.
Gary D’Addario was by reputation a man slow to anger, but Monroe
Street had clearly shortened his fuse. Earlier that week, Terry McLarney
had typed a routine memo requesting that two Western officers be detailed
to homicide to help with an ongoing probe; he had then forwarded the
missive directly to the administrative lieutenant, bypassing D’Addario. A
minor oversight in chain-of-command courtesy, but now, in the quiet of the
coffee room, D’Addario brings it up, using humor and overwrought
formality to make his point.
“Sergeant McLarney,” he says, smiling, “while I have your attention I
wonder if I might inquire as to an administrative matter.”
“That’s not my whiskey bottle in the top right drawer,” blurts out
McLarney, straight-faced. “Sergeant Landsman put it there to discredit me.”
D’Addario laughs for the first time.
“And,” McLarney deadpans, “I would respectfully like to point out that
Sergeant Nolan’s men have been using the cars without signing the vehicle
book as I have properly trained my squad to do.”
“This is about another matter.”
“Something to do with conduct unbecoming an officer?”
“Not at all. This is purely administrative in nature.”
“Oh.” McLarney shrugs, sitting down. “You had me worried there for a
second.”“I’m just a little concerned because a certain memo you penned was
addressed to a lieutenant in this police department other than myself.”
McLarney sees his mistake immediately. Monroe Street has everybody
stepping light.
“I didn’t think. I’m sorry.”
D’Addario waves off the apology. “I just need to have your answer to
one particular question.”
“Sir?”
“First of all, I take it you are of the Roman Catholic faith.”
“And proud of it.”
“Fine. Then let me ask: Do you accept me as your true and only
begotten lieutenant?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And thou shalt have no other lieutenants before me?”
“No, sir.”
“And thou shalt forever keep this covenant and worship no false
lieutenants?”
“Yes.”
“Very good, sergeant,” says D’Addario, extending his right hand. “You
may now kiss the ring.”
McLarney leans toward the large University of Baltimore band on the
lieutenant’s right hand, feigning a gesture of exaggerated subservience.
Both men laugh and D’Addario, satisfied, takes a cup of coffee back to his
own office.
Alone in the coffee room, Terry McLarney stares at the long white
rectangle, understanding that D’Addario has already forgotten and forgiven
the wayward memo. But the red ink on D’Addario’s side of the board—
that’s cause for some real concern.
Like most supervisors in the homicide unit, McLarney is a sergeant with
a detective’s heart, and like D’Addario, he sees his role as largely
protectionist. In the districts, the lieutenants can order their sergeants and
the sergeants can order their men, and it all works as the general orders
manual says it should—chain of command is suited to patrol. But in
homicide, where the detectives are paced as much by their own instinct and
talent as by the caseload, a good supervisor rarely makes unequivocal
demands. He suggests, he encourages, he prods and pleads ever so gently
with men who know exactly what needs to be done on a case withouthaving to be told. In many ways, a detective sergeant best serves his men by
completing the administrative paperwork, keeping the brass at bay and
letting the detectives do the job. It is a reasoned philosophy, and McLarney
holds firm to it nine out of ten days. But every tenth day, something
suddenly compels him to attempt a pattern of behavior consistent with the
sort of sergeants they warn you about in the academy.
A heavyset Irishman with cherubic features, McLarney drapes one
stubby leg over a desk corner and looks up at the white rectangle and the
three red entries below his nameplate. Thomas Ward. Kenny Vines. Michael
Jones. Three dead men; three open cases. Definitely not the best way for a
squad to start a new year.
McLarney is still staring at the board when one of his detectives walks
into the coffee room. Carrying an old case folder, Donald Waltemeyer
grunts a monosyllabic greeting and walks past the sergeant to an empty
desk. McLarney watches him for a few minutes, thinking of a way to begin
a conversation he doesn’t really want to have.
“Hey, Donald.”
“Hey.”
“What are you looking at?”
“Old case from Mount Vernon.”
“Homosexual murder?”
“Yeah, William Leyh, from eighty-seven. The one where the guy was
tied up and beat,” says Waltemeyer, shuffling through the file to the five-by-
seven color photos of a half-nude, blood-soaked wreck, hog-tied on an
apartment floor.
“What’s up with that?”
“Got a call from a state trooper in New Jersey. There’s a guy in a mental
institution up there who says he tied up and beat a guy in Baltimore.”
“This case?”
“Dunno. Me or Dave or Donald is going to have to go up there and talk
to this guy. It could all be bullshit.”
McLarney shifts gears. “I always said you were the hardest-working
man in my squad, Donald. I tell everybody that.”
Waltemeyer looks up at his sergeant with immediate suspicion.
“No, really …”
“What do you want, sergeant?”
“Why do I have to want anything?”“Hey,” says Waltemeyer, leaning back in his chair, “how long have I
been a policeman?”
“Can’t a sergeant compliment one of his men?”
Waltemeyer rolls his eyes. “What do you want from me?”
McLarney laughs, almost embarrassed at having been so easily caught
playing the role of supervisor.
“Well,” he says, treading carefully, “what’s up with the Vines case?”
“Not much. Ed wants to bring Eddie Carey back in and talk to him, but
there isn’t much else.”
“Well, what about Thomas Ward?”
“Talk to Dave Brown. He’s the primary.”
Pedaling with his feet, McLarney rolls his chair around to the side of
Waltemeyer’s desk. His voice drops to a conspiratorial tone.
“Donald, we’ve got to make something happen with some of these fresh
cases. Dee was in here looking at the board just a few minutes ago.”
“What are you telling me for?”
“I’m just asking you, is there anything that we’re not doing?”
“Is there anything I’m not doing?” says Waltemeyer, standing up and
grabbing the Leyh file off the desk. “You tell me. I’m doing everything I
can, but either the case is there or it isn’t. What should I be doing? You tell
me.”
Donald Waltemeyer is losing it. McLarney can tell because
Waltemeyer’s eyes have begun to roll up into his forehead the way they
always do when he gets steamed. McLarney worked with a guy in the
Central who used to do that. Nicest guy in the world. Pretty long fuse. But
let some yo with an attitude ride him too far, those eyeballs would roll up
like an Atlantic City slot. It was a sure sign to every other cop that
negotiations had ended and nightsticks were in order. McLarney tries to
shrug off the memory; he continues to press the point with Waltemeyer.
“Donald, I’m just saying it doesn’t look good to start out the year with
so many cases in the red.”
“So what you’re saying to me, sergeant, is that the lieutenant came in
here and looked at the board and gave you a little kick, so now you’re
gonna kick me.”
The whole truth and nothing but. McLarney has to laugh. “Well,
Donald, you can always go kick Dave Brown.”
“Shit rolls downhill, doesn’t it, sergeant?”Fecal gravity. The chain of command defined.
“I don’t know,” says McLarney, backing away from the conversation as
gracefully as possible. “I don’t think I’ve ever actually seen shit on a hill.”
“I understand, sergeant, I understand,” says Waltemeyer, walking out of
the coffee room. “I been a policeman a long time now.”
McLarney leans back in his chair, resting his head against the office
blackboard. He absently pulls a copy of the police department newsletter off
the top of the desk and scans the front page. Grip-and-grin photographs of
commissioners and deputy commissioners shaking hands with whichever
cop managed to survive the last police shooting. Thank you, son, for taking
a bullet for Baltimore.
The sergeant tosses the newsletter back on the desk, then gets up, giving
one last glance at the board on his way out of the coffee room.
Vines, Ward and Jones. Red, red and red.
So, McLarney tells himself, it’s gonna be that kind of year.
TUESDAY, JANUARY 26
Harry Edgerton begins the day right, his freshly shined loafer narrowly
avoiding a piece of the dead man’s ear as he pushes through the screen door
of a Northeast Baltimore townhouse.
“You just missed his ear.”
Edgerton looks up quizzically at a ruddy-faced patrolman leaning
against a living room wall.
“What was that?”
“His ear,” the uniform says, pointing down at the parquet floor. “You
just missed stepping on it.”
Edgerton looks down at a pale lump of flesh next to his right shoe. It’s
an ear, all right. Most of the lobe and a short, curled stretch of the outer
ridge, resting just beyond the welcome mat. The detective glances at the
dead man and the shotgun on the sofa, then moves toward the other end of
the room, choosing his steps carefully.
“How does that line go,” says the uniform, as if he had practiced it for a
week. “Friends, Romans, countrymen …”
“Police are some sick fucks,” laughs Edgerton, shaking his head.
“Who’s handling this one?”
“Straight-up suicide. She’s got it.”An older patrolman points to a younger uniform sitting at the dining
room table. The officer, a black woman with delicate features, is already
writing out her incident report. Edgerton makes her immediately for a
uniform new to the street.
“Hey there.”
The woman nods.
“You found him? What’s your unit number?”
“Four-two-three.”
“Did you touch him or move anything around?”
The woman looks at Edgerton as if he’s just dropped in from another
solar system. Touch him? She doesn’t even want to look at the poor bastard.
The woman shakes her head, then glances over at the body. Edgerton looks
over at the red-faced officer, who understands and accepts the detective’s
silent plea.
“We’ll walk her through it,” the older uniform says quietly. “She’ll be
okay.”
The academy had been turning out policewomen for more than a decade
and as far as Edgerton was concerned, the verdict was still out. Many
women had joined the department with a reasonable understanding of the
job and a willingness to perform; some were even good cops. But Edgerton
knew there were others out on the street who were absolutely dangerous.
Secretaries, the older hands called them. Secretaries with guns.
The tales became worse with each telling. Everyone in the department
had heard about the girl out in the Northwest, a novice who got her gun
taken from her by that mental case in a Pimlico convenience store. And
there was that female officer in the Western who called in the Signal 13
while her partner was getting the shit kicked from him by a family of five in
a Sector 2 rowhouse. When the radio cars came racing up the street, they
found the woman standing at the curb, pointing toward the front door of the
house like some kind of crossing guard. Stories like that could be heard in
every district roll call room.
Even as other sections of the department became grudgingly familiar
with the idea of women officers, the homicide unit remained a bastion of
male law enforcement, a lewd, locker room environment where a second
divorce was regarded almost as a rite of passage. Only one female detective
had ever lasted for any length of time: Jenny Wehr spent three years in
homicide, time enough to prove herself a good investigator and exceptionalinterrogator, but not long enough to begin anything that could be considered
a trend.
It was only two weeks ago, in fact, that Bertina Silver had transferred
into the homicide unit on Stanton’s shift, making her the only female among
thirty-six detectives and sergeants. In the judgment of other detectives who
had worked with her in narcotics and patrol, Bert Silver was a cop:
aggressive, hard, intelligent. But her arrival in homicide did little to change
the prevailing political view among many detectives, who regarded the
decision to give badges to women as unequivocal evidence that the
barbarians were rattling the gates of Rome. For many in the homicide unit,
the reality of Bertina Silver did not contradict the established theory, she
was simply an exception. It was an unjustified but necessary contortion of
logic that kept her out of the accepted equation: The women officers are
secretaries, but Bert is Bert. Friend. Partner. Cop.
Harry Edgerton would have been the last person to complain about Bert
Silver, whom he regarded as one of the unit’s better recruits. This opinion
held despite a continuing campaign of aggression and hegemony being
waged by Bert for partial control of Edgerton’s desk. After years of having
a place to call his own in the homicide office, Edgerton had been told at the
beginning of the year to double up with Bert because of a space shortage.
He did so grudgingly and soon found himself on the defensive. Once such
innocuous additions as family portraits and a gold statuette of a
policewoman were granted space on the desktop, they were followed by
hairbrushes and loose earrings in the upper right drawer. Then came the
unending assault of the lipstick canisters and the arrival of a perfumed scarf
that kept finding its way back to the bottom drawer, where Edgerton kept
his suspect files from several previous drug investigations.
“That’s it,” said the detective, pulling the scarf out of the drawer and
stuffing it into Bert’s mailbox for the third time. “If I don’t fight back, she’ll
be putting curtains up in the interrogation room.”
But Edgerton didn’t fight back, and eventually Bert Silver had half the
desk. In his heart of hearts, Harry Edgerton knows that is as it should be.
Then again, this young thing writing an incident report at the dining room
table is no Bert Silver. Despite the older officer’s assurance, Edgerton takes
the uniform aside and speaks softly.
“If she’s the first officer, she’s going to have to wait for the crime lab
and then do the ECU submissions.”The comment is almost an open question. More than once a medical
examiner has turned a seeming suicide into a murder, and God knows it
won’t do to have some recent academy product tangling up chain-of-
custody on every item submitted to evidence control. The uniform
understands without another word spoken.
“Don’t worry. We’ll walk her through it,” he repeats.
Edgerton nods.
“She’ll be okay,” the officer says, shrugging. “Hell, she’s more on the
ball than some we’re seeing.”
Edgerton opens his small steno pad and walks back into the dining
room. He begins asking both uniforms the standard questions, pulling
together the raw material for a death investigation.
On the first page, dated 26 Jan. in the upper right corner, the detective
has already recorded the details of his own notification by a police
dispatcher at 1:03 P.M.: “1303 hours/Dispatch #76/serious shooting/5511
Leith Walk.” Two lines below that, Edgerton has recorded his time of
arrival at the scene.
He adds the name of the young female officer, her unit number and time
of arrival. He asks for the incident number, 4A53881—4 representing the
Northeastern District, A signifying the month of January, the remaining
digits the basic tracking number—and writes that down as well. Then he
records the number of the city ambulance unit that responded and the name
of the medic who pronounced the victim. He finishes off the first page with
the time of the ambo crew’s pronouncement.
“Okay,” says Edgerton, turning to take his first interested look at the
dead man. “Who do we have here?”
“Robert William Smith,” says the red-faced officer. “Thirty-eight, no …
thirty-nine years.”
“He lives here?”
“He did, yeah.”
Edgerton writes the name on the second page followed by M/W/39 and
the address.
“Anyone here when it happened?”
The female officer speaks up. “His wife called nine-one-one. She said
she was upstairs and he was down here cleaning his shotgun.”
“Where is she now?”
“They took her to the hospital for shock.”“Did you talk to her before she left?”
The woman nods.
“Write what she told you in a supplemental report,” Edgerton says. “Did
she say why he might’ve killed himself?”
“She said he has a history of mental problems,” says the red-faced
officer, breaking in. “He just got out of Springfield Hospital on the
eleventh. Here’s his commitment papers.”
Edgerton takes a creased green sheet of paper from the officer and reads
quickly. The dead man was undergoing treatment for personality disorders
and—bingo—suicidal tendencies. The detective hands the paper back and
writes two more lines in his notepad.
“Where did you find that?”
“His wife had it.”
“Is the crime lab on the way?”
“My sergeant called them.”
“How about the medical examiner?”
“Lemme check on that,” says the officer, walking outside to key his
radio. Edgerton throws his notepad on the dining room table and pulls off
his overcoat.
He does not move directly toward the body but instead walks around the
perimeter of the living room, looking along the floor, walls and furniture.
For Edgerton, it has become second nature to begin at the periphery of the
crime scene, moving toward the body in a slowly shrinking circle. It is a
method born of the same instinct that allows a detective to walk into a room
and spend ten minutes filling a notepad with raw data before taking a
serious look at the corpse. It takes a few months for every detective to learn
that the body is going to be there, stationary and intact, for as long as it
takes to process the crime scene. But the scene itself—whether it happens to
be a street corner, automobile interior or living room—begins to deteriorate
as soon as the first person finds the body. Any homicide detective with
more than a year’s experience has already collected one or two stories about
uniformed men walking through blood trails or handling weapons found at
a murder scene. And not just the uniforms: More than once a Baltimore
homicide detective has arrived at a shooting scene to discover some major
or colonel wandering through a fresh scene, pawing the shell casings or
going through a victim’s wallet in a determined effort to put prints on every
conceivable bit of evidence.Rule Number Two in the homicide lexicon: The victim is killed once,
but a crime scene can be murdered a thousand times.
Edgerton marks the direction of spatter from the body, reassuring
himself that the spray of blood and brain matter is consistent with a single
wound to the head. The long white wall behind the sofa and to the dead
man’s right is marred by one red-pink arc extending upward from a half
foot above the victim’s head to nearly eye level at the front door frame. It is
a long, curled finger of individual spatters that seems to point, in its final
trajectory, toward the piece of ear near the welcome mat. A smaller arc
extends across the top cushions of the sofa. In the small space between the
sofa and the wall, Edgerton finds a few shards of skull and, on the floor just
below the dead man’s right side, much of what had once occupied the
victim’s head.
The detective looks closely at several of the individual spatters and
satisfies himself that the blood spray is consistent with a single wound, fired
upwards, into the left temple. The calculation is a matter of simple physics:
A blood droplet that strikes a surface from a 90-degree angle should be
symmetrical, with tentacles or fingers of equal length extending in any and
every direction; a droplet that strikes a surface at an odd angle will dry with
the longest tentacles pointing in a direction opposite the source of the blood.
In the case at hand, a blood trail or spatter with tentacles pointing in any
direction other than from the victim’s head would be hard to explain.
“Okay,” says the detective, pushing back the coffee table to stand
directly in front of the victim. “Let’s see what you’re about.”
The dead man is nude, his lower half wrapped in a checkered blanket.
He is seated in the center of the couch, with what remains of his head
resting on the back of the sofa. The left eye stares at the ceiling; gravity has
pulled the other deep into its socket.
“That’s his federal tax form on the table,” says the red-faced uniform,
pointing to the coffee table.
“Oh yeah?”
“Check it out.”
Edgerton looks down at the coffee table and sees the familiar cover page
of a 1040.
“Those things drive me crazy, too,” says the uniform. “I guess he just
lost his head.”Edgerton moans loudly. It is still too early in the day for unchecked
constabulary wit.
“He musta been itemizing.”
“Police,” Edgerton repeats, “are sick fucks.”
He looks at the shotgun between the victim’s legs. The 12-gauge is
resting with its stock on the floor, barrel upward, with the victim’s left
forearm resting on the upper barrel. The detective gives the weapon a once-
over, but the crime lab will need a photograph, so he leaves the gun resting
between the victim’s legs. He takes the dead man’s hands in his own. Still
warm. Edgerton convinces himself that death was recent by manipulating
the ends of the fingers. Every now and then, some irate husband or wife
wins the argument by shooting the significant other and then spends three or
four hours wondering what to do next. By the time they seize on the notion
of staging a suicide, the victim’s body temperature has dropped and rigor
mortis is evident in the shorter facial and finger muscles. Edgerton has had
cases where the killers caused themselves much useless aggravation by
attempting to push the rigid fingers of the not so recently departed inside
the trigger guard of a weapon, an effort that fairly screams foul play by
giving the body the appearance of a department store mannequin with a
prop glued to its ungrasping hand. But Robert William Smith is one very
fresh piece of meat.
Edgerton puts pen to paper: “V. braced gun between legs … muzzle to
right cheek … large GSW to right side head. Warm to touch. No rigor.”
Both uniforms watch as Edgerton pulls on his overcoat and deposits the
notepad in an outside pocket.
“You’re not staying for the crime lab?”
“Well, I’d love to but …”
“We’re boring you, aren’t we?”
“What can I say?” says Edgerton, his voice dropping to something
approximating a matinee idol baritone. “My work here is done.”
The red-faced officer laughs.
“When the guy gets here, tell him I just need photos of this room, and
tell him to get a good shot of the guy with the gun between his legs. We’re
going to want to take the gun and that green sheet.”
“The discharge papers?”
“Yeah, that goes downtown. What about securing this place? Is the wife
coming back?”“She was pretty messed up when they took her out of here. I guess we’ll
find a way to lock the place up.”
“Yeah, good.”
“Is that it?”
“Yeah, thanks.”
“No problem.”
Edgerton looks over at the female uniform, still seated at the dining
room table.
“How’s your report coming?”
“It’s done,” she says, holding up the face sheet. “Do you want to see it?”
“No, I’m sure it’s fine,” says Edgerton, knowing a sector sergeant will
review it. “How do you like the job so far?”
The woman looks first at the dead man, then at the detective. “It’s
okay.”
Edgerton nods, waves to the red-faced officer and walks out, this time
carefully sidestepping the ear.
Fifteen minutes later, he is at a typewriter in the homicide unit’s
administrative office, converting the contents of three notepad pages into a
single-page 24-hour crime report, Criminal Investigation Division form
78/151. Even with Edgerton’s hunt-and-peck typing skills, the details of
Robert William Smith’s terminus are condensed to a manageable
memorandum in little more than a quarter hour. Case folders are the
essential documentation for homicides, but the 24-hour reports become the
paper trail for the activities of the entire Crimes Against Persons section. By
checking the log containing the twenty-fours, a detective can quickly
familiarize himself with every ongoing case. For each incident, there is a
corresponding one-or two-page missive with a brief, declarative heading,
and a detective flipping through the log can look at those headings for a
complete chronological account of Baltimore’s violence:
“… shooting, shooting, questionable death, cutting, arrest/homicide,
serious shooting, homicide, homicide/serious shooting, suicide,
rape/cutting, questionable death/poss overdose, commercial robbery,
shooting …”
Dead, dying or merely wounded, there is a form 78/151 for every victim
in the city of Baltimore. In little more than a year in homicide, Tom
Pellegrini has probably filled in the blanks on more than a hundred twenty-
fours. By that same estimate, Harry Edgerton has gone through fivehundred forms since transferring to homicide in February 1981. And
Donald Kincaid, the senior detective in Edgerton’s squad and a homicide
man since 1975, has probably typed well over a thousand.
More than the board, which tallies only homicides and their clearances,
the 24-hour log is the basic measure of a detective’s workload. If your name
is on the bottom of a twenty-four, it means you were picking up phones
when the call came in or, better still, you volunteered yourself when another
detective held up a green pawn shop card with an address scrawled on it
and asked a question older than the headquarters building itself: “Who’s
up?”
Harry Edgerton didn’t volunteer often and among the other members of
his squad, that simple fact had turned into an open wound.
No one in the squad doubted Edgerton’s abilities as an investigator and
most would admit that, personally, they kind of liked the guy. But in a five-
man unit where the detectives all worked one another’s cases and handled
every kind of call, Harry Edgerton was something of a lone wolf, a man
who regularly wandered off on his own extended adventures. In a unit
where most murders were won or lost in the first twenty-four hours of
investigation, Edgerton would pursue a case for days or even weeks,
running down witnesses or conducting surveillance on a time clock all his
own. Perennially late for roll calls and shift relief on nightwork, Edgerton
might just as easily be discovered putting together a case file at 3:00 A.M.
when his shift had ended at midnight. For the most part, he worked his
cases without a secondary detective, taking his own statements and
conducting his own interrogations, oblivious of whatever storms were
buffeting the rest of the squad. They regarded Edgerton as more of a finesse
pitcher than a bullpen workhorse, and in an environment where quantity
seemed to matter more than quality, his work ethic was a constant source of
tension.
Edgerton’s background only added to the isolation. The son of a
respected New York jazz pianist, he was a child of Manhattan who joined
the Baltimore department on a whim after glancing at an ad in the
classifieds. Whereas many of those in homicide had spent their childhood
on the same streets they were now policing, Edgerton’s frame of reference
was Upper Manhattan, tinged with memories of visits to the Metropolitan
Museum after school and nightclub engagements where his mother would
accompany the likes of Lena Horne or Sammy Davis, Jr. His youth was asfar removed from police work as a life could conceivably be: Edgerton
could claim to have seen Dylan in the early Greenwich Village years, and
he later sang lead for his own rock ’n’ roll group, an ensemble with the
flower child name of Aphrodite.
A conversation with Harry Edgerton was apt to wander from foreign art
films to jazz fusion to the relative quality of imported Greek wines—an
expertise acquired through his marriage into the Brooklyn family of a Greek
merchant who had brought his family to New York after several successful
years of trading in the Sudan. All of which made Harry Edgerton, even at
the settled age of forty, an enigma to his colleagues. On midnight shift,
when the rest of his squad might be sitting together, watching Clint
Eastwood fondling the largest and most powerful handgun in the world,
Edgerton could be found writing out an office report in the coffee room,
listening to a tape of Emmylou Harris singing Woody Guthrie. And during
the dinner hour, Edgerton was likely to disappear into the back of an East
Baltimore Street carryout, where he would park in front of a bank of video
games and lose himself in a fevered effort to blast apart multicolored space
critters with a laser death ray. In an environment where a willingness to
wear a pink necktie is held suspect, Edgerton was a certified flake. One of
Jay Landsman’s throwaway lines pretty much summed things up for the
entire unit: “For a communist, Harry’s a helluva detective.”
And though Edgerton was black, his cosmopolitan background, his
coffeehouse leanings, even his New York accent so completely confounded
expectations that he was regarded as inauthentic by white detectives
accustomed to viewing blacks through the limited prism of their own
experience in the Baltimore slums. Edgerton crossed up stereotypes and
blurred the unit’s preconceived racial lines: Even black detectives with local
roots, like Eddie Brown, would routinely suggest that while Edgerton was
black, he certainly wasn’t “po’ and black,” a distinction that Brown, who
drove a Cadillac Brougham the size of a small container ship, reserved for
himself. And on those occasions when white detectives needed someone to
anonymously call some West Baltimore address to see if a wanted suspect
happened to be at home, Edgerton would be quickly discouraged.
“Not you, Harry. We need someone who sounds like a black guy.”
Edgerton’s detachment from the rest of the unit was furthered by his
partnership with Ed Burns, with whom he had been detailed to the Drug
Enforcement Administration for an investigation that consumed two years.That probe began because Burns had learned the name of a major narcotics
trafficker who had ordered the slaying of his girlfriend. Unable to prove the
murder, Burns and Edgerton instead spent months on electronic and
telephone surveillance, then took the dealer down for drug distribution to
the tune of thirty years, no parole. To Edgerton, a case like that was a
statement of a kind, an answer to an organized drug trade that could
otherwise engage in contract murder with impunity.
It was a persuasive argument. Close to half of Baltimore’s murders were
believed to be related to the use or sale of narcotics, though the solve rate
for drug murders was consistently lower than that for nearly any other
motive. Yet homicide’s methodology hadn’t changed with the trend:
Detectives worked the drug-related murders independently, as they would
any other homicide. Both Burns and Edgerton had argued that much of the
violence was related and could only be reduced—or, better still, prevented
—by attacking the city’s larger narcotics organizations. By that argument,
the repetitive violence of the city’s drug markets betrayed the weakness in
the homicide unit, namely, that the investigations were individual,
haphazard and reactive. Two years after that initial DEA case, Edgerton and
Burns again proved the point with a year-long probe of a drug ring linked to
a dozen murders and attempted murders in the Murphy Homes housing
project. Every one of those shootings had remained open after detectives
followed the traditional approach, yet as a result of the prolonged
investigation, four murders were cleared and the key defendants received
double life sentences.
It was precision law enforcement, but other detectives were quick to
point out that those two probes consumed three years, leaving two of the
unit’s squads short a man for much of that time. The phone still had to be
answered and with Edgerton reporting to work at the DEA field office, the
other members of his squad—Kincaid and Garvey, McAllister and Bowman
—would each be handling more shootings, more questionable deaths, more
suicides, more murders. The fallout from Edgerton’s prolonged absences
had served to push him further from the other detectives.
True to form, Ed Burns is at this very moment detailed to a sprawling
FBI probe of a drug organization in the Lexington Terrace projects—an
investigation that will eventually consume two years. Edgerton originally
went with him, but two months ago he was shipped back to the homicide
unit after a nasty budget dispute between federal and local supervisors. Andthe fact that Harry Edgerton is now back in the standard rotation, pecking
away at a 24-hour report on something as menial and undramatic as a
suicide, is a source of glee to the rest of the shift.
“Harry, what’re you doing at the typewriter?”
“Hey, Harry, you didn’t handle a call, did you?”
“What is it, Harry, a big investigation?”
“Are you gonna get detailed again, Harry?”
Edgerton lights a cigarette and laughs. After all the special details, he
knows he has this coming.
“Pretty funny,” he says, still smiling. “You guys are a fucking riot.”
Carrying paperwork of his own to the other admin office typewriter,
Bob Bowman leans over and looks at the headings on Edgerton’s twenty-
four.
“A suicide? Harry, you went out on a suicide?”
“Yeah,” says Edgerton, playing the game. “See what happens when you
answer the phone?”
“I’ll bet you’re never gonna do that again.”
“Not if I can help it.”
“I didn’t know you were allowed to do suicides. I thought you only did
big investigations.”
“I’m slumming.”
“Hey, Rog,” says Bowman as his squad sergeant walks into the office,
“do you know Harry went out on a suicide?”
Roger Nolan only smiles. Edgerton could be a problem child, but Nolan
knows him to be a good detective and is therefore tolerant of his
idiosyncrasies. Besides, Edgerton has more than a simple suicide on his
plate: He caught the first murder of the year for Nolan’s squad, a
particularly vicious stabbing from the Northwest that showed no sign of
going down easily.
It was the first leg of a midnight shift two weeks back that Edgerton met
Brenda Thompson, an overweight, sad-faced woman who finished twenty-
eight years in the rear seat of a four-door Dodge found idling at a bus stop
and pay phone in the 2400 block of Garrison Boulevard.
The crime scene was largely the Dodge, with the victim slumped in the
back seat, her shirt and bra hiked up to display a chest and stomach marked
by a dozen or more vertical stab wounds. On the floor of the back seat, the
killer had dumped the contents of the victim’s purse, indicating an apparentrobbery. Beyond that, there was no physical evidence in the car—no
fingerprints, no hairs, no fibers, no torn skin or blood beneath the victim’s
fingernails, no nothing. Without witnesses, Edgerton was in for a long haul.
For two weeks, he had worked backward on Brenda Thompson’s last
hours, learning that on the night of her murder she was picking up money
from a stable of young street dealers who sold her husband’s heroin along
Pennsylvania Avenue. The drugs were one motive, but Edgerton couldn’t
discount a straight-up robbery either. Just this afternoon, in fact, he had
been across the hall in CID robbery, checking knife attacks in the
Northwest, looking for even the slimmest of new leads.
That Edgerton has been working a fresh murder doesn’t count for much.
Nor does it matter to anyone in his squad that he took the suicide call with
little complaint. Edgerton’s workload remains a sore point with his
colleagues, Bowman and Kincaid in particular. And as their sergeant, Roger
Nolan knows that it can only get worse. It’s Nolan’s responsibility to keep
his detectives from one another’s throats, and so, more than anyone in the
room, the sergeant listens to the banter with the understanding that every
comment has an edge.
Bowman, for one, can’t leave it alone. “I don’t know what we’re
coming to when Harry has to go out and handle a suicide.”
“Don’t worry,” mutters Edgerton, pulling the report from the typewriter,
“after this one, I’m done for the year.”
At which point, even Bowman has to laugh.